

Abstract. Huge annotated corpora are relevant for many Natural Language Processing tasks such as Sentiment Analysis. However, a manual
and more precise annotation is always costly and becomes prohibitive
when the corpus is too large. This paper presents a semi-supervised learning based framework for extending sentiment annotated corpora with
unlabeled data, named CasSUL. The framework was used to extend in
eight times TTsBR, a corpus of 15.000 tweets in Brazilian Portuguese
manually annotated in three polarity classes. The extended annotated
corpus was used to train several polarity classiﬁers and the results show
that some combinations of classiﬁer and features can preserve the annotation quality of the original corpus in the resulting corpus.
Keywords: Corpus annotation
Sentiment analysis


· Semi-supervised learning

Introduction

Several tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP) require annotated datasets,
or corpora, for training and evaluating methods and comparing diﬀerent systems.
The process of manual annotation of corpora, although precise, is usually costly
and becomes prohibitive when scaled to larger datasets. For popular tasks on
NLP, such as Sentiment Analysis (SA), the study that analyzes people’s opinions,
sentiments, evaluations, appraisals, attitudes, and emotions towards entities [10],
we can ﬁnd widely used corpora that serve as baselines for novel methods and
approaches proposed for the task. Two examples are the Stanford Sentiment
Treebank [21] and SemEval datasets [13] that are used for evaluating state-ofthe-art models due to the reliability of the annotation and to the large number
of labeled documents.
For Brazilian Portuguese we can ﬁnd in the literature several corpora for the
same task, but the high costs with manual annotation limit the resources to be
either small or obtained trough entirely automatic methods such as user scores in
websites or using semantic tips such as presence/absence of emoticons. Furthermore the data presented in these corpora may become outdated, incomplete or
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018

do not be large enough for machine learning approaches, such as Deep Learning
architectures, that rely on larger datasets for generalizing classiﬁcation.
In this paper we introduce CasSUL, a semi-supervised framework annotating
sentiment corpora using a small portion of annotated data and extending it with
a large set of unlabeled documents, reducing human eﬀort on annotation and
providing a middle-ground between manual and automatic labeling of a large
dataset.

2

Related Work

The creation of datasets for SA was largely addressed in the literature. Several
authors have made eﬀorts in using automatic labeling methods for creating SA
corpora due to the challenges involved in the manual annotation – hiring and
training annotators; measuring agreement between annotators; writing guidelines; developing interfaces; and more.
In some domains, such as product reviews, users give scores (sometimes
grades or stars) for evaluating the target material. Previous works in SA used
these scores for automatic identifying positive and negative reviews [16,22]. For
Portuguese, some authors followed same approach for creating large datasets,
such as Buscap´e and Mercado Livre [2,9].
With the growth of social networks and blogs, the number of available data for
NLP studies has grown as well, but despite the high volume of data these websites
usually do not contain score based systems as the previous. One alternative is
to use Distant Supervision, which is the selection of a consistent feature for
identifying semantic orientation in texts. [8] adopted emoticons for this task on
Twitter, using a selection of positive emoticons and negative emoticons. This
approach performs well for two classes and has been used by other researches [5,
15]. One of the weaknesses of this method is that it removes an important feature
from the dataset, the emojis; and it is also limited to binary classiﬁcation only,
since deﬁning any sentence without emojis neutral would add too much noise
and it is hard to form a list of neutral emoticons.
On the other hand, semi-supervised approaches have been shown eﬀective for
improving classiﬁers using unlabeled data for sentiment analysis [6,19,20]. The
results using self-training, an iterative method of adding classiﬁed documents
to the training subset, have improved the classiﬁcation. This has motivated the
framework described below.

The CasSUL Framework

We propose a semi-supervised approach for labeling sentiment corpora, named
CasSUL. This was implemented as a self-training iterative framework following
Fig. 1. CasSUL input is a small dataset of manual labeled documents and a larger
set of unlabeled documents. The main goal is to use machine learning classiﬁers
for training models and iteratively increase the labeled documents using reliable
classiﬁed data.

Semi-supervised Sentiment Annotation of Large Corpora

Initially we use a manually annotated dataset for training a sentiment classiﬁcation model. This model is used for predicting labels for the unlabeled documents. We use the probability of the predicted labels for ranking the unlabeled documents by the most reliable. In each iteration we add a subset of
these data (the most reliable) to the initial dataset, thus increasing its size and
re-classifying the remaining unlabeled data each time. We manually set a percentage of data (the threshold shown in Fig. 1) deﬁning how many documents
will be added to the training set in each iteration. For example, a threshold of
0.05 will add ﬁve percent of the documents in each iteration resulting in twenty
iterations.

Fig. 1. CasSUL: a semi-supervised framework for corpus annotation.

The intuition behind CasSUL is that manual annotation is necessary in subjective tasks such as SA and should be part of the process. Besides that the
iterative addition of new samples provide new information for the classiﬁers,
thus resulting in better classiﬁcation models for labeling the remaining unlabeled data.
CasSUL diﬀers from other semi-supervised approaches presented in the literature [6,19,20]. Usually the authors use a percentage based on the conﬁdence
level (eg. only documents with 90% of conﬁdence will be added to the training
dataset). We have modiﬁed that since we addressed sentiment classiﬁcation in
three classes using unbalanced corpora as main resource. Preliminary experiments showed that classiﬁers trained with skewed data learned biased models
and the majority class usually overcame the others, propagating the bias even
more. Moreover, the use of this approach in three class classiﬁcation was challenging since high values of conﬁdence resulted in iterations adding just a few
documents and ﬁnishing the run in ﬁve or less steps. The same issue remained
even with lower conﬁdence values.


The experiments demanded a SA corpus in Brazilian Portuguese manually annotated and even though the literature oﬀers several datasets for the task, they
are either too small, or present strong unbalanced class distribution, or did not
go through a reliable evaluation of the annotation process. We compiled and
manually annotated a Brazilian Portuguese dataset of TV show commentaries
from Twitter for our main experiments – the TweetSentBR (TTsBR) [4]. The
corpus contains 15.000 tweets labeled in three classes and is split in train/test,
12.999 and 2.001 tweets, respectively.
For the experiments we used the same queries for creating TTsBR and
extracted new data (117.050 documents) to be used as the unlabeled dataset.
Since this dataset does not have manual annotation, we compared results
achieved by models trained with TTsBR train set to the ones obtained with
the CasSUL extended corpus (TTsBR train + unlabeled data) both predicting
the TTsBR test set.
We also evaluated CasSUL framework using other corpora: Buscape, Mercado
Livre and Brazilian Elections. Since we do not have a complete deﬁnition of the
data we could not extract new documents for experiments so we only used the
available data. Buscape is a product review corpus that contains 13.685 documents labeled with positive or negative tags [9]. Mercado Livre is also a product
review corpus containing 43.818 documents also labeled in two classes [2]. Both of
them are balanced corpora automatically labeled using scores provided by users.
Brazilian Elections is a two-set tweet corpus about two running candidates for
presidency in 2010 Brazilian Elections, Dilma and Serra [17]. The ﬁrst set contains 66.643 documents and the second, 9.718. Both corpora are annotated in
two classes and unbalanced.
Another dataset we used in our experiments is Pelesent [5]. The corpus was
created through distant supervision using emojis and emoticons. It contains
980.067 tweets automatically labeled in two classes and unbalanced. We performed experiments evaluating models trained with Pelesent and with the CasSUL extended corpus.
3.2

Data Representation and Classification

Before running the experiments we preprocessed all the data tokenizing the documents, removing punctuation marks and symbols (we kept emojis and emoticons), replacing user names and urls (for the tags USER and URL) and mapping
character repetitions, such as in “I looooove Star Wars.” normalized to“I loove
Star Wars.” (keeping some clue of repetition is importante since it carries semantic information). The preprocessing was made using Enelvo [3], an NLP tool for
normalization developed for Brazilian Portuguese.
For handling the data two forms of representation were used: word embeddings and a feature approach. The word embeddings used in this work are
shown in [5] and were trained with 14 million tweets using word2vec [11] in two
approaches - a 50-dimension skip-gram trained model and a 600-dimension c-bow

Semi-supervised Sentiment Annotation of Large Corpora
trained model. The feature representation is based on six literature approaches:
(a) Bag-of-words: a unigram bag-of-words with occurrence of terms. This
method is quite usual in SA [1,2]. (b) Negation words: using a negation
word list for Brazilian Portuguese, as proposed in [2]. We count the number
of negation (such as “no”,“never ” and “nothing”) and append it to the data
representation. (c) Emoticons: Emoticons are an enriched representation of
emotions on Twitter [8,15]. They are composed of characters grouped to resemble emotion faces, such as angry or love. We used a list of positive and negative
emoticons presented in [1,2] to identify the occurrence of polarity emoticons in
the document. (d) Emojis: Emojis are similar to emoticons, but instead of
groups of characters, they are composed by special characters that represent
draws [5]. We used Emoji Sentiment Ranking [14] for obtaining positive, neutral
and negative scores for each emoji, and the average of emojis score in the each
document is used as feature. (e) Sentiment lexicon: We also used the sentiment lexicon Sentilex [18] for identifying sentiment words in the documents. The
number of positive and negative words in each document is used as a feature.
(f ) Part-of-speech tag: The tagger from NLPnet [7] was used for extracting
the PoS tags of the words, and the numbers of verbs, nouns, adjectives and
adverbs of each document are used as features. They can be useful specially
for the identiﬁcation of the neutral class, since the number of adjectives may
indicate polarity documents.

Experiments and Results

For our experiments with CasSUL we used six machine learning classiﬁers Support Vector Machines, Bernoulli Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, Multilayer Perceptron, Decision Trees and Random Forest. We used scikit-learn, a
Python machine learning library, for the classiﬁers implementation and for calculating the prediction probabilities (used for ranking the most reliable labels in
each iteration). Due to space constraints, the results presented in the following
subsections were summarized, and details of every experiment can be found in
https://bitbucket.org/HBrum/tweetsentbr/ as well as the framework itself.

Hyperparameter Optimization

We performed a grid-search scheme using diﬀerent hyperparameter for each classiﬁer. The polarity classiﬁcation was evaluated by using a 10% subset of the training corpus (if the test corpus were used for evaluation, the parameters would be
biased). For every classiﬁer we combined each representation (as shown in Subsect. 3.2) and classiﬁer parameters. We also added a machine learning based
feature selection using an SVM as presented in [1].
Every model was trained ﬁve times for each classiﬁer using the training set of
TTsBR (removing the 10% validation subset). The averages of the results were
taken in order to rank the executions and get the best sets of representations
and hyperparameters. The combinations of classiﬁers and hyperparameters are
listed below.


(a) SVM: With c values varying as 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1 and 10. The hyperparameters obtained were bag-of-words + emoticons + emojis and feature selection
using c=1. (b) Naive Bayes: With alpha values varying as 0.1, 0.5 and 1. The
best results were obtained with bag-of-words + emoticons + emojis + sentiment lexicon + PoS tagging and feature selection using alpha=0.1. (c) Logistic
Regression: We did not explore any hyperparameters for logistic regression,
only the representations. The best ﬁt was bag-of-words + emoticons + emojis +
PoS tagging and feature selection. (d) Multilayer Perceptron: Relu was used
as activation function in our experiments with MLP. We varied the number of
layers (1 and 2), the number of neurons with 30, 60, 100 and 200 (using always
the same number even with two layers), the alpha with 0.001, 0.001 and 0.01
and the learning rate with 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1. The best representation was bagof-words + negation words + emoticons + emojis + sentiment words + PoS
taggin and feature selection. The best results were obtained with two layers, 200
neurons, alpha=0.001 and learning-rate=0.001. (e) Decision Trees: We varied
the criterium of the tree split using gini and entropy, the maximum depth of the
tree with 4, 5, 8 and with no limit. The best ﬁt was bag-of-words + negation
words + emoticons + emojis without feature selection using gini as criterium
and not establishing a maximum depth. (f ) Random Forest: We varied the
number of estimators (30, 60, 100 and 200), the criterium (gini or entropy) and
the maximum depth (4, 5, 8 and without limit). The best results were obtained
with bag-of-words + negation words + emoticons + emojis and feature selection
using 200 estimators, entropy as criterium and without maximum depth.
4.2

TTsBR + CasSUL Extension Using Unlabeled Data

For evaluating CasSUL framework we ran the framework using TTsBR train
set (12.999 documents) as the manually labeled input and extended it with the
unlabeled data extracted (117.090) documents. At the end of the last iteration
the full corpus will contain 130.089 documents, being a combination of the manual labeled data with the unlabeled classiﬁed set. After we obtained the ﬁnal
corpus, we trained six models (using the six classiﬁers presented before) using
it and predicted the TTsBR test set labels (2.001 documents), measuring the
F1-measure of each model and averaged the value.
We repeated the process using seven thresholds of conﬁdence empirically
set (40%, 30%, 25%, 20%, 10%, 5% and 1%) and changing the classiﬁer responsible for the classiﬁcation model used by CasSUL. Table 1 presents the results
obtained for each corpus generated (each cell represents the average F1-Measure
of each corpus). For example, the ﬁrst line of the Table presents the evaluation
of a CasSUL extended corpus obtained with SVM classiﬁer ran with each of the
seven thresholds of conﬁdence.
The intuition behind the thresholds is that using a lower threshold we ensure
more iterations and less documents being added to the ﬁnal corpus more slowly.
Using a higher threshold we add more documents in each iteration (possibly
adding more noise to the dataset).

Semi-supervised Sentiment Annotation of Large Corpora

391

Table 1. Average F1-measure obtained by each classiﬁer using diﬀerent thresholds in
three polarity classes on TTsBR.
Classiﬁer


The same process was applied to the original dataset obtaining 61.01 on
average F1-Measure. The extended corpus obtained the best results using MLP
classiﬁer. Since we are using a held-out subset, our main goal was to achieve
values close to the obtained with the original manually annotated corpus.
One phenomena observed during the experiments was the skewing of the
majority class in TTsBR (positive). This skewing caused the positive documents
to be added early and far more than the others. Some of the ﬁnal corpora
generated had only 7% of the documents labeled as neutral, while 63% were
labeled positive. In order to reduce this skewing we used under-sampling [12],
removing documents for the majority class to balance the corpora, and repeated
the experiments. The results are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Average F1-measure obtained by each classiﬁer using diﬀerent thresholds in
three class sentiment analysis on balanced TTsBR.
Classiﬁer

40%

30%

25%

20%

10%

5%

1%

Linear SVM

60,57

60,84

60,69

60,81

60,91

59,19

56,60

Naive Bayes

57,16

56,08

55,27

54,36

49,06

46,78

45,01

61,71 61,48 61,55

58,93

53,56

50,30

Logistic regression 61,45
MLP

62,13 60,64

61,10

61,68 61,60 61,50 61,64

Decision tree

Random forest

Although the results did not improve, the ﬁnal corpora kept the balance.
Neutral documents rose from 7% to 15% when using under-sampling. All the
distributions (with and without under-sampling) had positive as majority class
in the extended corpora. We believe this class may be the easiest to set apart
from the neutral and negative, achieving the best conﬁdence levels and being
added more frequently to the corpora.

H. B. Brum and M. G. V. Nunes

Using CasSUL on Fully Labeled Corpora

We also evaluated CasSUL using only manually labeled data. For this experiment we used Buscap´e Corpus, Mercado Livre Corpus and Brazilian Elections (Elections-Dilma and Elections-Serra). For each corpus we used a 10%
sample of the data observing the labels and the remaining 90% of the documents as unlabeled data. All the experiments on these corpora were performed
on binary classiﬁcation, since none of them contains neutral documents. We used
the same hyperparameters as the experiments presented in Subsect. 4.1. The only
diﬀerence is the absence of a test set for evaluation since in this scenario we had
the correct labels for the data automatic annotated.
Our best extended corpora with Buscap´e obtained 84.74% of F1-Measure
using Logistic Regression with 1% threshold. Without extension we achieved
87.66% of F1-Measure on the same 10-fold scheme. For Mercado Livre we
achieved 93.17% of F1-Measure also with Logistic Regression with threshold
10%, but still under the 94.76% obtained without extension. Using ElectionsDilma corpus we obtained 83.69% with a MLP extended corpus using 1% threshold as the best value. Without the extension the same experiment resulted in
93.15% F1-Measure. For Elections-Serra we achieved 88.23% with a Random
Forest extension using 30% threshold, but 93.63% without extension. Both of
the corpora are unbalanced and we can see how this skewing aﬀects our framework.
4.4

Comparison Between Our Approach Vs Distant Supervision

Distant Supervision is a popular method for annotating a large scale corpus for
SA, since it demands almost no human eﬀort and can be scalable for hundreds
of thousands of documents, even on social networks. Pelesent [5] is a distant
supervision corpus for Brazilian Portuguese created using emojis and emoticons. It contains 980.067 tweets automatically labeled through this approach.
We have compared Pelesent with the extended TTsBR generated by CasSUL,
with 117.090 documents, on the polarity classiﬁcation task.
Three classiﬁers, Linear SVM, MLP and Logistic Regression, were used for
training models using Pelesent and TTsBR extended (the corpus obtained with
MLP using threshold 30%) and the evaluation was carried on cross domain
corpus (Buscap´e, Mercado Livre and Brazilian Elections). In this scenario we
did not used the optimized hyperparameters, since it was designed for other
domain. Instead we used the word embeddings trained in [5] with word2vec,
600-dimensions/c-bow.
Since Pelesent is only labeled in two classes, we used only pos/neg TTsBR
documents, reducing its size to 128.030 documents total. In Table 3 we can see the
results of general F1-Measure for each class. Although seven times smaller, the
corpus annotated via CasSUL framework achieved better results than Pelesent
in almost every experiment.

Semi-supervised Sentiment Annotation of Large Corpora

393

Table 3. Comparison between TTsBR extented using MLP with 30% threshold and
Pelesent on cross-domain polarity classiﬁcation.
Evaluation corpus Classifier

Extended TTsBR

Pelesent

F-pos F-neg F-Measure F-pos F-neg F-measure
Elections-Dilma

Elections-Serra

Mercado livre

Buscap´
e-1

Buscap´
e-2

5

Linear SVM

MLP



Linear SVM


Log. Regression 

Discussion and Future Work

In this paper we presented CasSUL, a framework for annotation of sentiment
corpora using self-training. Using CasSUL, the size of the manually annotated
corpus TTsBR was extended eight times. The extended TTsBR, when used
in a polarity classiﬁcation task, achieved similar results when compared to the
original corpus. This performance has to be conﬁrmed in other NLP tasks, but
this evidence of preservation of the annotation quality encourages us to create
more representative annotated corpora, as new annotated examples are added
to them, with no additional annotation cost. CasSUL was also superior to the
most popular alternative for automatic labeling a large datasets for SA (Distant
Supervision), even with a corpus ten times bigger.
CasSUL is limited by the self-training known weaknesses as error propagation
and skewed class distributions, but this could be reduced by the use of other
techniques such as under-sampling or of other semi-supervised alternatives like
co-training, for example. Despite of the results with annotated corpora had been
inferior to the ones of non-extended corpora, we believe that the size of the
datasets may be a key factor on this issue.
Improvements in CasSUL could include: the addition of a step where manual annotators could revise the machine labels (Active Learning), as successfully
reported in [6]; more classiﬁers could be added in order to improve even more the
conﬁdence on the ﬁnal corpus. The use of Deep Learning methods are very recommended since neural architectures have been achieving state-of-the-art values
regularly and this approach can be easily inputed in CasSUL.
