
Abstract. We present a study in the area of sentiment analysis of clients’
commentaries transcribed by assistants of a help-desk service of one Portuguese
telecommunications company. We have adopted a lexicon-based approach to
determine the polarity of the sentiment of each commentary, based on the so
called opinion words. This task was by no means easy, as not many tools are
available for the Portuguese language. The initial results with the off-the-shelf
solutions were rather poor. This has motivated us to carry out a number of
enhancements, including, for instance, enriching the given lexicon with domain
specific terms, formulating specific rules for negation and amplifiers.
Automatic pruning of some of the lexicon terms has led to a significant
improvement in performance. As our final system achieved a very good
performance, our work should be of interest to others working on domain
specific solutions for languages where ready-made solutions are not available.
Keywords: Sentiment analysis in Portuguese, Lexicon-based approaches,
Lexicon enrichment, Negation of sentiment words, Amplifiers and attenuators.

1 Introduction
In recent years characterized by emergence of social networks, blogs and forums,
individuals and organizations used these means to express their opinions. As a result,
there has been a continuous increase in the daily volume of information generated by
users of social platforms, which created new challenges. First, it is not humanly
possible to read all this information. Another problem is that organizations may be
unaware of what the customers’ opinions are. The customers may publish their
opinions, sometimes quite negative ones, which are disseminated quickly reaching a
large number of people and the company may be unaware of this. Thus organizations
strive to continuously update their information, so as to understand the customers’
behavior better, enabling them to predict their next steps.
According to some sources [3], 80% of customer data captured within enterprises
is in unstructured format, in the form of call center transcriptions or e-mails from

customers and employees. It is relevant to study how customers manifest themselves
over time, enabling to detect changes in their preferences and identify patterns of their
behavior or detect that customers may effectively stop paying for certain services or
products.
This situation has motivated us to undertake this study. The data comes from one
customer service department of a major Portuguese telecommunications company.
This service involves questions concerning customer satisfaction, promotional
campaigns, password change and description of problems that need to be resolved. It
provides means for the customers to express their opinions and ask questions. This
service is coordinated by technical assistants who answer phone calls from customers,
while transcribing the contents of each call in a form of commentaries.
Our aim was to analyze this data and determine in an automatic way the polarity of
each commentary. We have adopted a lexicon-based approach and employed two
lexicons (Afinn, Sentilex) initially, but only Sentilex could be used directly with
Portuguese texts. The terms of Affin had to be translated from English into
Portuguese. Unfortunately, the results were rather disappointing. This has motivated
us to carry out various enhancements whose aim was to improve the results. One
involved the inclusion of domain specific terms in the lexicon which lead to a marked
improvement in performance. We have also formulated specific rules determining
how negation should be treated in Portuguese, and similarly, investigated also
intensifiers and attenuators. Each of these led again to improved results. Perhaps the
most surprising finding was that the method of automatic pruning of some of the
lexicon terms proved beneficial for performance. The performance of the final system
was indeed very good in terms of predictive accuracy of (81.9%) and also, in terms of
cost-sensitive analysis described later.
The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows: Section 2 presents a review of
the literature in the area of sentiment analysis and special attention is paid to works
focusing on Portuguese texts. Section 3 starts with an overview of a typical sentiment
analysis system and then continues with the description of different enhancements of
the system that led to improved results. Section 4 discusses the results obtained and
Section 5 presents conclusions and suggestions for future work.

2 Related Work
Sentiment analysis (SA) is a field of study that examines opinions, feelings,
evaluations, attitudes and emotions in relation to entities such as products, services,
organizations, people, events and topics [10]. Most work in this area is carried out for
the English language [12, 13]. For the Portuguese language the available resources are
rather scarce. As it has rather specific characteristics (e.g. multiple verbal forms,
specific rules for negation), developing a SA system can be considered a challenge.
Several methods have been proposed for the automatic determination of a
sentiment value in text documents [10, 13, 17]. The most common approach involves
considering this a text classification task, where the aim is to determine whether a
document expresses a negative, neutral or positive opinion. The two main approaches
are a lexicon-based approach and a machine learning approach [22].

The machine learning approach uses a set of features to learn a classifier. The
features represent terms or in general unigrams, bigrams or multi-word units, which
may in addition be characterized by part-of-speech tags. Although this approach may
obtain good results, the transfer of the model - trained classifier - to another domain
may not lead to good results [2].
The lexicon-based system can be developed manually [21], [23] or automatically
[6], [24], [25]. This approach uses a sentiment lexicon, which includes words or
expressions together with their polarities. It is important that the lexicons have a good
coverage of words that appear in the texts that need to be processed.
As for the number of polarity levels, some researchers have considered just three
(e.g. negative, neutral and positive or -1,0,1 if we use numbers), while other used
more. In the work reported here we use 7 levels (-3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3), where the value -3
(3) represents the most negative (positive) sentiment value. We have adopted 7 levels
because our client – the telecommunications company – has requested this.
Some authors claim that lexicon-based methods are more robust than the machine
learning approaches (ML) [22]. However, our initial experiments with the lexiconbased approach did not result in good performance in our application domain. This
indicates that this approach may also suffer from fragilities attributed by Taboada et
al. [22] to ML approaches.
One study in Portuguese [18] determines the sentiment of texts from Twitter
messages relative to five political leaders involved in the 2011 parliamentary
elections. The task was first to identify the political leaders and then determine the
polarity of each Twitter message. The sentiment analysis was based on lexical
polarity, lexical-syntactic patterns and inference rules.
Some people have also studied the so called polar expressions. Polanyi et al. [15]
have proposed the following rule to deal with such expressions: “If a given polar
expression includes negation, the sentiment value of the associated expression should
be reversed”. This rule is also applicable to Portuguese texts, although as we will see
further on, in some situations it is useful to use a somewhat different rule.
Another line of work involves considering amplifiers and attenuators of the
sentiment value. The most common way to identify these terms is by a recourse to a
list of adverbs and adjectives. Polanyi et al. [15] modified the sentiment value of the
subsequent word by adding or subtracting 1. For example, suppose the amplifier very
has been used within the expression very beautiful. As beautiful has a sentiment value
of +2, the resulting value of the expression is 2+1=3.
Brooke [1] has proposed to treat amplifiers in a somewhat different way. Instead of
adding (or subtracting) a fixed value, the author proposed to increase (or decrease) the
sentiment value by a certain percentage. However, the author did not provide details
on how the percentage is determined.

3 Adapting the Approach of Sentiment Analysis for Portuguese
As some readers may not be familiar with sentiment analysis (SA), the next
subsection provides an overview of a typical lexicon-based approach. This serves also
as a basis for describing the enhancements carried out for Portuguese (subsection 3.2).

3

3.1 Overview of a Typical Lexicon-based Approach to Sentiment Analysis
The typical lexicon-based sentiment analysis method involves basically two major
steps, pre-processing and calculation of the sentiment value of texts using sentiment
lexicons. Both are described in more detail below.
Pre-processing
Many pre-processing steps used in SA tasks are commonly used also in classification
of texts or clustering. Therefore our description here is rather brief, as readers may
consult other sources [4, 7, 20].
One important step involves transformation of capital letters to lower case enabling
to identify words that are similar, but not written in exactly the same way. The
following steps normally include removal of numbers, punctuation symbols, short
words (e.g. consisting of 1-2 characters), blanks and stopwords. All these items are
normally not relevant and their elimination does not usually effect the outcome.
Many systems apply also stemming which consists of eliminating the suffixes,
while retaining only the root of the word. Stemming algorithms depend strongly on
word formation rules. So, direct application of an English stemmer may result in an
undesirable outcome when applied to other languages including Portuguese [8]. This
is why some researchers have adopted lemmatization instead, which selects a
representative form (e.g. infinitive) from a given set of words with the same root.
Usage of lexicons to calculate the sentiment value
After the preprocessing has been carried out, the chosen sentiment lexicon is used to
derive the sentiment value of a given text. This is done by processing all words. If a
particular word appears in the sentiment lexicon, its sentiment value is recorded. The
sentiment value of the given text is determined by summing up all the sentiment
values encountered. This process is illustrated by the following example:
cliente quer (2) desativar (-2) serviços pois vai sair sem período fidelização
(the customer wants to stop the services, because he will leave without the loyalty period)

The only words that appear in a sentiment lexicon are quer and desativar with
sentiment values of +2 and -2. So the resulting sentiment value of this phrase is 0.
3.2 Enhancements of the Basic Approach for Sentiment Analysis in Portuguese
The results of the basic system just described, when applied to our document set in
Portuguese were rather disappointing, because the predictive accuracy was rather low.
This is the reason why we have set out to carry out different enhancements with the
objective to improve of performance, acceptable to the telecommunications company.

3.2.1 Our Dataset and the Lexicons Used
The document collection use here consists of commentaries of clients that were
gathered in a period of about 3 months in 2014, totaling 1724 cases. Each document
includes one commentary, consisting of about 17 words on average.
Lexicon Sentilex: This sentiment lexicon was elaborated for the Portuguese
language and contains more than 82k entries. It was developed specifically for data
mining applications and classification of sentiments in Portuguese [19]. The entries
can be inflected forms of words, which can be included within expressions.
Expressions can contain a one or more words (compound expressions) and typical
idioms. The sentiment values are on an integer scale ranging from -1 to 1.
Lexicon Afinn and AffinP: Lexicon Affin includes 2477 words and phrases in
English, whose sentiment value range from -5 to 5, where -5 (5) is associated with
very negative (positive) words [11]. This lexicon was translated into Portuguese
manually which was quite time consuming task, lasting about 3 weeks. The
Portuguese version, AffinP, includes 1997 words.
Domain specific lexicon AffinPD: We have noted that the lexicons above did not
include many of the terms that were used in clients’ commentaries. So, for instance,
the words comprar and fidelização (buy and loyalty agreement) which do not exist in
Sentilex, nor in AffinP, are indicative of a positive action on the part of client. The
word reclama (complains) exists only in AffinP, but not in Sentilex. It transmits
clearly a negative sentiment.
This analysis has motivated us to explore the hypothesis that elaborating a domain
specific lexicon may lead to a marked improvement of performance. We have decided
to use AffinP as a starting point, as this lexicon attained better performance than
Sentilex. Some of sentiment values in AffinP were altered, taking into account the
specificities of the domain of telecommunications. The domain specific lexicon is
referred to as AffinPD and includes 6915 words. It uses the sentiment scale of Afinn
ranging from -5 to 5. As this lexicon was elaborated manually, this task was rather
time consuming and required about 2 months to complete.
The percentage of words covered by AffinPD of our text documents was around
88.3%, whereas in the other lexicons this rate was quite low (reaching about 20%).
Our experimental results presented later show that the addition of domain specific
terms leads to a marked improvement of performance.
Optimizing the Lexicon by Pruning: It is conceivable that not all terms in the
given lexicon are useful and that maintaining them there may in fact be detrimental to
performance. We have decided to investigate this issue. This study was conducted
only for AffinPD lexicon. The method used for constructing the optimized lexicon is
similar to the feature selection method called Backward Elimination [4]. The method
processes all terms in turn. In each step the system determines the effect of
eliminating a particular term on the overall performance of the system. If the
performance decreased, the term is maintained, but otherwise it is be dropped. In this
phase we have used a validation set (different from the test set) which consisted of
about 600 commentaries accompanied by a sentiment value.

5

3.2.2 Different Enhancements Carried Out
Enhanced Pre-Processing
The pre-processing steps described in section 3.1 were re-used in the system
described in this section, which includes several enhancements described next.
Restricted Stemming: It may happen that some words that have different
sentiment value before stemming become indistinguishable after stemming. Some
examples are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Undesirable effects of stemming for some Portuguese words
Lexicon
AffinP
AffinP
Sentilex
Sentilex

Word
afetado (affected)
afeto (feeling)
fala (speaks)
falido (bankrupt)

Sentiment value
-2
3
0
-1

Root
afet
afet
fal
fal

For this reason, in this work stemming is applied selectively only to words that do not
appear in the sentiment lexicon. Usage of lemmatization would have been another
possible alternative.
Rewrite rules: The texts written by operators often include several different
variants of the same word (e.g. desativar, desactivar). This is undesirable, as some of
these variants may not appear in the lexicon. Therefore, we have decided to formulate
a set of rules (635 in total) that substitute certain abbreviations and misspelled
variants by their standardized form. Below we give two examples of such rules:
clt → cliente
desactivar → desativar
The second rule transforms the word desactivar from the old orthographic convention
to the new one.
Removal of short texts: Our enhanced preprocessing comprises also the removal
of commentaries which include only 1 word, as these transmit hardly any information.
Domain-specific stopwords: This stage focuses on building a list of domainspecific stopwords, or predefined phrases recorded by operators that do not transmit
any unusual sentiment value. This list includes 345 items. Consider, for instance:
Boa tarde, bem-vindo ao apoio ao cliente se pretende ajuda sobre um tema (…)
Good afternoon, welcome to customer support if you want help on a topic (...)
The words boa (good), apoio (support), ajuda (help) would be attributed a positive
sentiment value and hence influence the final scores. However, this does not make
sense, as these words do not convey any sentiment value on the part of the client.

3.2.3 Dealing with Polar Expressions
Our system deals also with expressions that include negation which are sometimes
referred to as polar expressions. These may include, for instance, a negation word,
such as não (no or not in English) followed by some other word or expression, such as
divertido (funny in English). If we did not introduce any special treatment, we could
obtain a counterintuitive result. Suppose the sentiment value of não is -1 (as in AffinP)
and the sentiment value of divertido is 3, the resulting value would be positive.
The rule proposed by Polanyi et al. [15]: “If a given polar expression includes
negation, the sentiment value of the associated expression should be reversed”,
suggests a solution, which is also applicable to Portuguese texts. So, in our example
with não (-1) divertido (3), the resulting value would be -1×3=-3. In the following this
rule is referred to as inversion rule and is used in all cases where the word appearing
after negation has a positive sentiment.
However, there are cases when the word appearing after negation has a negative
sentiment. The application of the above rule would lead to an incorrect value.
Consider, for instance, the phrase “cliente não (-1) quer ser mais incomodado (-2)”
(customer doesn't want to be more disturbed). It does not seem right to attribute it a
positive sentiment value resulting from -1x(-2)=2. In our system this phrase is
attributed the value of -2 (the sentiment value of incomodado). We will call this rule
corrected inversion rule in the following. The results presented in Section 4 indicate
that the corrected inversion rule is preferable to the original rule.
Our system permits to process various other words besides the negation word não.
The list assembled contains 33 different words that modify the meaning of the
subsequent text. The list includes, for instance não, nunca, jamais, nem, ninguém,
nenhum, negativamente, tampouco, among others.
3.2.4 Amplifiers and Attenuators
Polanyi et al. [14], define contextual valence shifters as contextual phenomena that
modify the polarity of another term. According to the authors these can be divided
into three groups: inverters invert the polarity of a polarized item, intensifiers (or
amplifiers) intensify it and attenuators diminish it [9, 16]. Sentiment modifiers are
mostly adverbs (attractively, annoyingly), adjectives (better, bad), sentence
connectors (although, however, but), modal verbs (might, could, possibly) or even
nouns (freedom, bankruptcy).
We have followed this line of work, but adapted it to Portuguese, while focusing
mainly on sentiment modifiers that are adverbs and adjectives. Words such as
demasiado (too much), bastante (in sufficient number), pouco (a little) and menos
(less) do not exist in the sentiment lexicons analyzed. To resolve this issue, we have
assembled a list of 166 amplifiers and 35 attenuators. The process for calculating the
sentiment value of sentences is as follows:
If an amplifier is encountered:
If the value of the subsequent text is positive (negative), add (subtract) 1.
If an attenuator is encountered:
If the value of the subsequent text is positive (negative), subtract (add) 1.
3.2.5 Normalizing the Sentiment Values
As the ranges of the sentiment values in the lexicons used are different, the resulting
sentiment value of the given text (commentary) attributed by our system could depend
on which lexicon has been used. This is obviously undesirable. We have therefore
incorporated a normalization step, whose aim to transform the sentiment values
generated into a normalized range spanning from -3 till 3. This range was suggested
by the company who require that we not only identify the negative (positive) cases,
but distinguish how grave the situation is.
Normalization is relatively simple to carry out. Basically, it is necessary to divide
all values by normalization constant NAFFINPD or NSENTILEX, depending on which
lexicon is being used. After some analysis we have determined that the setting
NAFFINPD=4 and NSENTILEX= 1 is the most appropriate.
The sentiment values are illustrated by the following example that was already
used in Section 3.1. Here we show the effects of using the enriched lexicon, negation
rules and normalization.
cliente quer desativar (-5) serviços pois vai sair (-3) sem (-1) período fidelização (3)
Let us examine the effects of negation in this example. If we did not use it, the final
sentiment value (before normalization) would be -5-3-1+3=-4. The inversion rule for
negation transforms the last 3 words into sem período fidelização (-3) and hence the
score is -5-3-3= -11. This value needs to be normalized, which leads to -11/NAFFINPD =
-11/4 = -2.75. Finally, the sentiment value is mapped to the nearest integer value -3.
3.3 Evaluation of the sentiment classifier
The data for the evaluation consisted of 200 texts accompanied by their sentiment
value ranging between -3 and 3. The evaluation was carried out by comparing the
sentiment values generated with the ones that were attributed by a person (ground
truth). Two different performance measures were used - success rate and mean cost
per case. The use of cost-sensitive analysis was motivated by the fact that the
sentiment values -3, -2, .. 3 are on ordinal scale. It is therefore useful to consider how
far a particular prediction is from the correct value. Assuming that -3 and 3 are one
unit apart, the distance between -3 and -2, for instance, is a fraction of that distance,
i.e. 1/6=0.17 (after rounding). So this error has the cost of 0.17. The mean cost per
case is calculated by calculating the mean of the costs of individual documents.

4 Results
The results presented here are relative to our test dataset consisting of about 200 cases
accompanied by a sentiment value. The evaluation involved the set of 13 different
variants of our sentiment analysis system described next. We have conducted
experiments to determine to what extent the different facets incorporated in these
variants would improve the performance. Fig.1 shows the results.

1. Lexicon AffinP: This variant represents the very basic SA system with AffinP. It
achieved a modest success rate of 33.33% and mean cost of 16.85%.
2. Lexicon AffinPD: Similar to variant 1, but the system uses an enriched lexicon
containing domain-specific words. The success rate improves by 5.9%.
3. Pre-processing: This variant extends the previous variant and uses the basic prepre-processing method described in Section 3.1.
4. Rewrite rules, as described in Section 3.2.2. This led to quite significant reduction
of the mean cost by 1.88%.
5. Removal of texts with a single word (see Section 3.2.2).
6. Elimination of domain-specific stopwords (see Section 3.2.2).
7. Elimination of stopwords: We have reused the list of 203 Portuguese stopwords
available in R with the command stopwords('portuguese').
8. Restricted stemming (see Section 3.2.2).
9. Negation 1: This variant incorporates the inversion rule (see Section 3.2.3)
10. Negation 2: This variant extends the variant 8 by incorporating the corrected
inversion rule (see Section 3.2.3). This led to a significant cost reduction of 3.87%.
11. Amplifiers (see Section 3.2.3): This variant extends the variant 10. This led to a
cost reduction of 1.25%.
12. Attenuators (see Section 3.2.3).
13. Optimized Lexicon AffinPDO: The lexicon is pruned following the method
described in Section 3.2.1. The final version had a very good mean cost of 4.54%.
Each of the following versions extends its predecessor unless stated otherwise.

Fig. 1. Results of different variants of our system

We have carried out also experiments with Sentilex lexicon which is available for
Portuguese texts. Unfortunately, this system had poor results. The basic solution
achieved the success rate of 31.34% and the mean cost of 18.1% (i.e. worse than our
version 1 with AffinP). This lexicon had rather poor coverage of the words (only

9

about 5%) that appear in our commentaries. Also, the range of sentiment values range
from -1 to 1, which is probably insufficient to capture the nuances of sentiment.

5 Conclusions
Our aim was to develop a sentiment analysis system which could be applied to
Portuguese texts. This appeared a challenge, as not many tools were available.
Applying off-the-shelf solutions in conjunction with lexicon Sentilex, available for
Portuguese, gave poor results. We conjecture that this is due mainly to the fact that its
terms do not cover the domain of telecommunications well, and also, the range of just
three sentiment values is not able to capture the varied degrees of sentiments.
We have therefore analyzed a set of techniques with the objective of determining
whether these could lead to improved performance. Translating terms of the chosen
lexicon (Affin) into Portuguese and enriching it with domain-specific terms was rather
time consuming, but the effort paid off. It led to a marked improvement of
performance. There are many specific terms in the telecommunications that were not
present in the original lexicon. Defining rules enabling to translate words into its
standardized form was also useful.
We have also incorporated rules that deal with negation and adapted the inversion
rule described in literature to Portuguese. We did not limit ourselves just to the
negation word não, but defined an extended set of 33 negation words. We have
investigated situations when the word following the negation word has a negative
sentiment. The experiments on pre-classified data indicated that the corrected
negation rule is preferable to the usual inversion method (as in [15]). Finally, we have
incorporated rules that modify the sentiment value of expressions that include
amplifiers and attenuators, which required that a list of words be built for the
Portuguese language. The final system reached an excellent performance both in
terms of accuracy and mean cost.
Future work may involve the incorporation of an automatic spell-checker for
Portuguese. Elaborating rules manually to correct abbreviated or misspelled words is
time-consuming. We could also investigate the possibility of generating the enriched
lexicon through automated methods, rather than through a manual approach. As this
task is rather time-consuming, a great deal of time could be saved. Also, it would
make our system adaptable to other domains.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Nuno Paiva for defining this very interesting problem in the first place
and to João Cordeiro for his useful comments on this work.
We acknowledge the support of Project NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000020, financed by the
North Portugal Regional Operational Programme (NORTE 2020), under the PORTUGAL
2020 Partnership Agreement and support from ERDF – European Regional Development
Fund through the Operational Programme for Competitiveness and Internationalisation COMPETE 2020 Programme within project «POCI-01-0145-FEDER-006961», and by
National Funds through the FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology) as part of project UID/EEA/50014/2013.

