
Abstract. The growth of social media and user-generated content (UGC) on the
Internet provides a huge quantity of information that allows discovering the
experiences, opinions, and feelings of users or customers. These electronic Word
of Mouth statements expressed on the web are prevalent in business and service
industry to enable a customer to share his/her point of view. However, it is
impossible for humans to fully understand it in a reasonable amount of time.
Opinion mining (also known as Sentiment Analysis) is a sub-ﬁeld of text mining
in which the main task is to extract opinions from UGC. Thus, this work presents
an open source pipeline to analyze the costumer’s opinion or sentiment in Twitter
about products and services oﬀered by Brazilian companies. The pipeline is based
on General Architecture for Text Engineering (GATE) framework and the
proposed hybrid method combines lexicon-based, supervised learning, and rulebased approaches. Case studies performed on Twitter real data achieved precision
of almost 70 %.
Keywords: Text mining · Text classiﬁcation · Opinion mining · Sentiment
analysis · Portuguese language · GATE

1

Introduction

The growth of social media and user-generated content (UGC) on the Internet provides
a huge quantity of information that allows discovering the experiences, opinions, and
feelings of users or customers. The volume of data generated in social media has grown
from terabytes to petabytes [1].
These electronic Word of Mouth statements expressed on the web are much prevalent
in business and service industry to enable customer to share his/her point of view [2].
Companies, on the other hand, have used this information to improve the quality of its

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
J. Silva et al. (Eds.): PROPOR 2016, LNAI 9727, pp. 95–105, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-41552-9_9

96

E. Souza et al.

products and services. Studies informed that 88 % of Brazilian companies use at least
one social network [3].
Twitter has 320 million1 monthly active users and it oversees 1 billion ‘tweets’ every
day. Since it is a rich source of real-time information, many entities (companies, poli‐
ticians, government, etc.) have demonstrated interest in knowing the opinions of people
about services and products.
However, it is not possible for humans to fully understand UGC in a reasonable
amount of time, which explains the growing interest by the scientiﬁc community to
create systems capable of extracting information from it [4]. Speciﬁc processing
methods, techniques and algorithms are required in order to extract knowledge from
unstructured texts [5].
According to Liu [6], sentiment analysis, also known in the literature as opinion
mining, is the ﬁeld of study that analyzes people’s sentiments, evaluations, attitudes,
and emotions about entities such as products, services, organizations, individuals, issues,
events, topics, and their attributes expressed in textual input. This is accomplished
through the opinion classiﬁcation of a document, sentence or feature into categories:
‘positive’, ‘negative’, and ‘neutral’. This kind of classiﬁcation is referred to in the liter‐
ature as sentiment polarity or polarity classiﬁcation.
Given that the Portuguese language is one of the most common spoken languages
in the world - with almost 270 million people2 speaking some variant of the language,
and it is also the second most frequent language on Twitter [7], the goal of this work is
to provide an open-source opinion mining pipeline for ‘tweets’ written in Brazilian
Portuguese. The pipeline is based on the GATE [8] framework and the proposed hybrid
method combines lexicon-based, supervised learning, and rule-based approaches in
order to achieve better results and reduce context dependence [9].
The contributions of our paper are as follows:
1. An open-source application (see Footnote 3) to evaluate the customers’ opinion
about products and services oﬀered from Brazilian companies;
2. Experimental execution on a set of real micro-blogging posts to evaluate the
proposed pipeline;
3. A dataset3 containing 33306 tweets of the most complaints companies according to
Consumer Protection and Defense Program agency (PROCON);
4. Finally, we include a gold standard (See footnote 3) containing 543 tweets manually
labeled into three classes (polarity): positive, negative and neutral;
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 provides the related
work. Section 3 presents the opinion mining process. Section 4 details the pipeline,
called TOPIE. Section 5 presents an experimental evaluation with a real case study.
Finally, Sect. 6 contains the conclusions and directions for future work.

Related Work

Works dealing with Portuguese language are scarce, and most eﬀorts are directed
towards the English language [2, 6, 10]. After performing a systematic mapping review
on several scientiﬁc databases up to the year 2014, twenty-ﬁve papers relating the appli‐
cation of opinion mining for Portuguese (Brazilian and European variants) were iden‐
tiﬁed, from which eight papers [3, 11–18] have analyzed the consumers’ sentiment like
the study proposed in this paper.
The work of Nascimento et al. [11], and Santos and Ladeira [17] make use exclu‐
sively of machine learning as opinion mining approaches. On the other hand, Avanço
and Nunes [12], Freitas and Vieira [13], Santos et al. [18], and Chaves et al. [14] built
their sentiment analysis using lexicon-based approaches. The works of [3, 15, 16] are
more similar to our proposal as they adopted hybrid approaches, that is lexicon-based,
supervised learning, and rule-based approaches.
The work of Evangelista and Padilha [3] propose a tool to classify web publications
made on social networks such as Facebook and Twitter as positive, negative and neutral.
For the classiﬁcation task, this tool uses SentiWordNet lexical resource and the Naive
Bayes algorithm. In the realized experiments, the collected publications to classiﬁcation
are from three Brazilian e-commerce companies. The results were very relevant for
publications from Twitter using Naive Bayes algorithm for the e-commerce domain,
with a correct classiﬁcation rate of between 71 % and 95 %.
The works of Rosa et al. [15, 16] analyzes Brazilian Consumers’ Sentiments on
Twitter for the hair cosmetics domain using SentiMeter-Br. For the Portuguese
dictionary performance validation, the results were compared with the SentiStrength
algorithm and evaluated by three Specialists in the ﬁeld of study. The polarity of the
short texts was also tested through machine learning, with correctly classiﬁed instances
of 71.79 % by Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) algorithm.
Related papers presented in the last two paragraphs diﬀer from our proposal in some
aspects: (1) our opinion mining system was evaluated for multiple domains, such as
telecommunication, telephony, and banking; (2) the sentiment analysis of our approach
is executed in feature level through entities recognition; (3) the open-source pipeline as
well as the dataset used to build and evaluate the opinion mining system are available
for the use of other researchers; and (4) we have used only one tool (GATE) [8] to
perform all the opinion mining steps.

3

Opinion Mining Steps

Figure 1 presents the process used to build the proposed opinion mining application. It
is based on the work of Aranha and Passos [19] and divided into four steps which are
detailed in the following subsections. Resources and dataset are publicly available (See
footnote 3).

98

E. Souza et al.

Fig. 1. Opinion mining steps based on [19]

3.1 Data Acquisition
This step included the dataset collection and gold collection construction. We built a
web crawler to collect data from Topsy4 database. The crawler received as input the
companies’ identiﬁcation on Twitter and returned a list of tweets in JSON ﬁle. We have
collected more than 30000 tweets of companies that received the most complaints in
2013 according to PROCON (Table 1). The reason why those companies were selected
was that we would like to compare results from Twitter and PROCON.
Table 1. List of companies that received the most complaints in 2013 (PROCON)

For the gold collection, a total of 543 ‘tweets’ were manually labeled between three
classes: ‘positive’, ‘negative’, or ‘neutral’ by at least two researchers.
3.2 Pre-processing
We performed the following pre-processing techniques on input data: tokenization,
sentence split, part-of-speech (POS) and named entity recognition (NER). They are
detailed in Sect. 4.

TOPIE: An Open-Source Opinion Mining Pipeline

99

3.3 Processing
The opinion mining pipeline was built on the top of GATE [8] and it is based on [20],
as detailed in Sect. 4. Our classiﬁcation system performs the sentiment analysis at the
feature level of granularity. The polarity is determined using a hybrid approach that
combines machine learning as well as lexicon and rule-based.
A lexicon dictionary (Gazetteers) with more than 10000 words was built manually
from the analysis of 2000 tweets extracted from Corpora. The words are distributed in
several categories as shown on the left side in Fig. 2. The conditional balloon brings
together all terms used to describe a condition, for example, ‘if’ and ‘case’. Organization
lists the names of companies and some variations since it is common to ﬁnd the use of
informal language in social networks. Feeling contains terms related to an aﬃrmation
or denial, for example: ‘for sure’. Relationship has words focused on descriptions of
some relationships between the company and the person who made the post. An example
might be words like ‘bought’ and ‘waiting’. Emotion lists words that are related to the
emotional state of the user, such as ‘fear’, ‘sadness’ and ‘anger’. The Emoticon balloon
contains the emotions icons used to describe a feeling.

Fig. 2. Dictionary categories and grammatical rules

The balloons on the right side in Fig. 2 contains the built grammar rules to extract
conditional, tweet general information, date, URL, address, and relationship data. The
grammar rules were developed using JAPE, which is an annotation patterns engine based
on regular expression [8]. Figure 3 shows an example of a rule in Jape. Supposing that
the token ‘Smile’ is found in an opinion, the rule from Fig. 3 will annotate ‘aﬀect’ to
the category attribute and ‘joy’ to the kind attribute. Figure 4 shows the annotation result
for the token “ruim” (bad), which was classiﬁed as a negative feeling (sadness) and was
catch by the “ruleNegationOption” rule.
The Support Vector Machine (SVM) was selected as it is among the most frequently
used classiﬁers and has presented good overall result for the opinion mining tasks [2, 10].



3.4 Evaluation
We performed three experiments with diﬀerent sizes and classes balanced and selected
the precision, recall, and f-measure to evaluate the results as they very frequent opinion
mining measures [10].

4

TOPIE: Twitter Opinion Mining Information Extraction

Figure 5 presents the application architecture built in this study based on the work of
Bontcheva et al. [20]. The authors proposed the TwitIE pipeline, which is a modiﬁcation
of the GATE ANNIE [8] open-source pipeline for news text. The TwitIE pipeline was
customized to micro-blog texts for ﬁve languages (English, Dutch, German, French and
Spanish) at every stage and includes Twitter-speciﬁc data import and metadata handling.
The pipeline main components are represented in seven boxes and are detailed below.
Tweets are read in JSON format and converted into GATE document content. The pipe‐
line output is a XML annotated ﬁle, which can be used outside GATE.

TOPIE: An Open-Source Opinion Mining Pipeline

101

Fig. 5. TOPIE pipeline based on [20]

The gray boxes (Language Identiﬁcation and Normalizer) are the ones that we did
not use in our pipeline. The boxes with dashed border (Sentence Splitter and POS) were
replaced by OpenNLP resources already available for the Portuguese language. The
boxes with double border (Gazetteer and NER) were developed for this study. The box
with simple border (Tokenizer) was reused without modiﬁcation.
4.1 Language Identiﬁcation
The TwitIE system uses a TextCat algorithm adaptation to Twitter. The TextCat original
implementation recognizes more than sixty languages, including Portuguese. As our
pipeline was built and evaluated only for a single language (Brazilian Portuguese), we
did not make use of this component.
4.2 TwitIE Tokenizer
The TwitIE tokenizer is an adaptation of ANNIE’s English tokenizer [8]. This compo‐
nent was used in our pipeline without modiﬁcation. We have tried the Portuguese
OpenNLP Tokenizer, but it performed worse and the reason was that it was not adapted
for micro-blog texts, such as ‘tweets’. Such general purpose tokenizers need to be
adapted to work correctly on social media, in order to handle speciﬁc tokens like URLs,
hashtags, user mentions, special abbreviations, and emoticons [20]. Figure 6 shows the
component results for the token ‘bradesco’.

102

E. Souza et al.

Fig. 6. The tokenizer results on GATE annotation set view

4.3 Gazetteer Lookup
The gazetteer consists of lists such as cities, organizations, days of the week, etc. It also
contains the names of useful indicators, such as typical company designators (e.g.
‘Ltd.’), titles, etc. The gazetteer lists are compiled into ﬁnite state machines, which can
match text tokens. As shown in Fig. 2 we constructed a list with more than 10000 words
extracted from the built corpora. Those lists are publicly available (See footnote 3) and
can be reused in other opinion mining systems for Portuguese.
4.4 OpenNLP Sentence PT
The sentence splitter is required for the POS tagger component. The OpenNLP
Sentence5 - developed speciﬁcally to split sentences written in Portuguese, was reused
without modiﬁcation.
4.5 OpenNLP POS Tagger PT
POS Tagging is used to detect subjective messages by identifying the grammatical classes
of the words used in the text [21]. Usually adjectives, adverbs and some substantives and
verbs have polarity values [12]. The OpenNLP POS tagger PT (See footnote 5) developed
specifically to Portuguese was reused in our pipeline without modification.


4.6 Normalizer
This component performs the NLP normalization task, as a solution for overcoming or
reducing linguistic noise, very common in micro-blog texts. As this component is
language-dependent and it does not give support to Portuguese, it was removed from
our pipeline. However, we consider as future work, to implement a normalizer compo‐
nent speciﬁcally to micro-blogs texts written in Brazilian Portuguese.
4.7 Named Entity Recognizer
This component was developed speciﬁcally for this study. Grammar rules were built
using JAPE [7] to extract information about entities and features as shown in Fig. 2 (right
side). Entities such as products, services, organizations, individuals, issues, and their
attributes expressed in textual input are mapped in this step Fig. 7 presents the overall
results after the pipeline execution on GATE annotation set view.

Fig. 7. An example of the pipeline results on GATE annotation set view

5

Case Study

In order to evaluate the proposed pipeline, using the GATE plug-in Learning, three
experiments were performed using diﬀerent conﬁgurations. Table 2 reports the classi‐
ﬁcation results in precision, recall, and the f-measure on all datasets for the multiple
kernel-based SVM classiﬁer according to gold collection described in Sect. 3. The data‐
sets were built randomly and classes are unbalanced.
The dataset 3 from experiment 1 reaches the best precision (66,5 %) which has little
signiﬁcance when compared with the work of Bontcheva et al. [20] that reaches preci‐
sion of 77 %. The main reason is that we did not use speciﬁc components to handle short
texts from micro-blogs, such as POS tagging which plays an important role identifying
word classes that suggest sentiment polarity.
We observed that the used Tokenizer treats hashtags and user mentions as two tokens
with a separate annotation HashTag covering both which interferes in ﬁnal results.

104



Also, some characters that compose the date and time ﬁelds were identiﬁed as emotion
icons. However, our result is signiﬁcant when comparing to the ones presented for the
Portuguese language presented in Sect. 2, which reaches precision of 71.79 % by
Sequential Minimal Optimization algorithm and correct classiﬁcation rate between 71 %
and 95 % using Naive Bayes algorithm for a particular domain.

6

Conclusion

This paper presented TOPIE, a Twitter opinion mining information extraction pipeline
developed to handle ‘tweets’ written in Brazilian Portuguese. The pipeline was built on
the top of the GATE framework [8] and it is based on the work of Bontcheva et al. [20].
The polarity is determined using a hybrid approach that combines machine learning as
well as lexicon and rule-based. The sentiment analysis is executed in the level of feature
or aspect through entities recognition. Case studies performed on real data from Twitter
achieved precision of almost 70 % using SVM classiﬁer for the telecommunication,
telephony, and banking domains. Issues related to micro-blog were discussed, and the
requirement for domain adaptation demonstrated. There is still a signiﬁcant gap due to
insuﬃcient linguistic context and the noisiness of ‘tweets’.
By releasing TOPIE as open-source, and making dataset and gold collection publicly
available, we hope to give researchers an easily repeatable, baseline system against
which they can compare new algorithms. As future work, we plan to evaluate data using
diﬀerent classiﬁers such as Naïve Bayes and Decision Tree, and compare our corpusbased lexicon to already available lexicon resources for the Portuguese Language, such
as SentiLex-PT and OpLexicon. We plan also to adapt a Portuguese POS tagger and
implement the normalization task as texts from micro-blog are written in an informal
way, with grammatical errors, spelling mistakes, as well as ambiguous and ironic.
