

Abstract. Named Entity Recognition for person names is an important
but non-trivial task in information extraction. This article uses a tool
that compares the concordances obtained from two local grammars (LG)
and highlights the diﬀerences. We used the results as an aid to select
the best of a set of LGs. By analyzing the comparisons, we observed
relationships of inclusion, intersection and disjunction within each pair
of LGs, which helped us to assemble those that yielded the best results.
This approach was used in a case study on extraction of person names
from texts written in Portuguese. We applied the enhanced grammar to
the Gold Collection of the Second HAREM. The F-Measure obtained was
76.86, representing a gain of 6 points in relation to the state-of-the-art
for Portuguese.
Keywords: Concordance · Local grammar
Named Entity Recognition

1

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER) involves automatically identifying names of
entities such as persons, places and organizations. Person names are a fundamental source of information. Many applications seek information on individuals and
their relationships, e.g. in the context of social networks. However, extracting
this type of Named Entity (NE) is challenging: person names are an open word
class, which includes many words and grows every day [8].
“A good portion of NER research is devoted to the study of English, due to
its significance as a dominant language that is used internationally” [15, page
470]. An inﬂuential impetus to the development of systems for this purpose in
Portuguese came with the HAREM [9,14] events, a joint assessment of the area
organized by Linguateca [7]. The annotated corpora used in the ﬁrst and second
HAREM, known as the Golden Collection (GC), serve as a reference for recent
works on Portuguese NER.
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
A. Villavicencio et al. (Eds.): PROPOR 2018, LNAI 11122, pp. 57–65, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99722-3_6

58

J. P. C. Pirovani et al.

The main approaches used to develop NER systems involve (i) machine learning, whereby systems learn to identify and classify NEs from a training corpus, (ii) the linguistic approach, which involves manual description of rules in
which NEs can appear, and (iii) a hybrid approach that combines both previous
methods.
“Local grammars (LG) are finite-state grammars or finite-state automata
that represent sets of utterances of a natural language” [6, page 1]. They were
introduced by Maurice Gross [5] and serve as a way to group phrases with
common characteristics (usually syntactic or semantic). Describing rules in the
form of LGs for the construction of Information Extraction (IE) systems requires
human expertise and training in linguistics; little computational aid for this task
is available.
A method for constructing LGs around a keyword or semantic unit is presented by [6]. LGs for extracting person names from Portuguese texts were presented in [3,11]. In the Second HAREM [9], the Rembrandt system, which uses
grammar rules and Wikipedia as sources of knowledge [4], ranked best for the
‘person’ category. A comparison between four tools to recognize NEs in Portuguese texts [2] suggested that the rule-based approach is the most eﬀective
for person names. Recently, LGs have been successfully integrated in a hybrid
approach to Portuguese NER [12].
This paper describes how to use the Unitex concordance comparison tool [1]
as an aid to constructing an LG. Our point of departure was a set of LGs to
identify person names in Portuguese texts. By comparing concordances obtained
from them, we found some relationships between them in terms of set theory.
Taking into account these relationships, we picked the best LGs and combined
them in order to achieve better performance.
This article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the methodology used
in this work. The results of the study are presented in Sect. 3, and Sect. 4 presents
conclusions and avenues for future research.

2

The Methodology

The input to our experiment was a repository of small LGs to recognize person
names. Some were obtained from the literature (e.g. those presented in [3]) and
we created others.
All of these LGs were created and processed with Unitex [1], an open-source
system initially developed at University of Paris-Est Marne-La-Vall´ee in France.
A local grammar is represented as a set of one or more graphs referred to as Local
Grammar Graphs (LGG). Unitex allows for creating LGGs, preprocessing texts,
applying dictionaries to texts, applying LGs to extract information, generating
concordances and comparing concordances.
The LGG shown in Fig. 1 recognizes honoriﬁc titles such as Sr., Sra. and
Dr. (“Mr.”, “Mrs.”, “Dr.”) followed by words with the ﬁrst letter capitalized,
as identiﬁed by the code <PRE> in Unitex dictionaries. The <<..>> after <PRE>
denotes the application of a morphological ﬁlter to words with the ﬁrst letter capitalized, indicating that they must include at least two characters. This prevents

Concordance Comparison as a Means of Assembling Local Grammars

59

the recognition of deﬁnite articles at the beginning of sentences, for example.
Between the capitalized words, prepositions or abbreviations may occur and are
recognized by two graphs, Preposicao.grf and Abreviacoes.grf, which have been
created separately and are included as subgraphs. Examples of phrases recognized by the graph (occurrences) include Sra. Joana da Silva and Dr. Antˆ
onio
de Oliveira Salazar. A list of occurrences accompanied with one line of context
is referred to as a concordance.

Fig. 1. LGG G1 (ReconheceFormasDeTratamento.grf)

Unitex allows for attaching outputs to graph boxes. Outputs are displayed
in bold under boxes. In Fig. 1, <NOME> (“name”) and </NOME> shown under the
arrows represent such outputs. Unitex inserts them into the concordance when
a graph is applied in the “MERGE with input text” mode. Thus, the identiﬁed
names appear enclosed in these XML tags in the concordance ﬁle.
The LGs of the repository are small but can be combined to compose a larger
grammar to identify person names.
We applied the LGs of the repository to the Golden Collection (GC) of the
Second HAREM, producing a concordance ﬁle for each LG. We used Portuguese
and English dictionaries because several English names appear in GC texts.
The GC of the Second HAREM [9] is a subset of 129 annotated texts. These
texts have diﬀerent textual genres and are written in European or Brazilian
Portuguese. The HAREM classiﬁes ten categories of NEs: abstraction, event,
thing, place, work, organization, person, time, value, and other. Person names,
the focus of this work, are classiﬁed as a subtype within the ‘person’ category
and are represented by the code PERSON (INDIVIDUAL). In the GC of the
Second HAREM, 1,609 NEs are annotated with this code.
2.1

Concordance Comparison

We compared all the concordances pairwise (every pair of ﬁles) using the ConcorDiﬀ concordance comparison tool provided by Unitex. This tool can be
applied to any pair of concordance ﬁles, provided they are in the Unitex format, which is publicly documented in the manual [10].
The Unitex ConcorDiﬀ program compares two concordance ﬁles line by line
and shows their diﬀerences. The result is an HTML page that presents alternate

60

J. P. C. Pirovani et al.

lines of both concordances and that leaves an empty line when an occurrence
appears in only one of them. An example is presented in Fig. 2. The lines with
a pink background shading (lines 1, 3, 5 and 7) are from the ﬁrst concordance
(the ﬁrst parameter to ConcorDiﬀ), and those with a green background shading
(lines 2, 4 and 6) are from the other concordance (the second parameter to
ConcorDiﬀ).

Fig. 2. Part of a concordance comparison ﬁle (Color ﬁgure online)

Lines in blue characters (lines 1 and 2) are the occurrences common to the
two concordances. In the example shown in Fig. 2, this means that both LGs
recognized Michael Jackson. Lines in red characters (lines 3 and 4) correspond
to occurrences that overlap only partially, which is the case, for instance, when
an occurrence in a concordance is part of an occurrence in the other. In the
example, an LG recognized Luther King, and the other recognized Luther. Lines
in green characters (lines 5 and 7) are the occurrences that appear in only one
of the two concordances. Antonio Ricardo and Chico Buarque were recognized
only by the ﬁrst LG. Lines in purple characters indicate identical occurrences
with diﬀerent outputs inserted, which does not happen in this example.
We then analyzed the ﬁles generated by ConcorDiﬀ.
2.2

Composition of LG from Concordance Comparisons

Let GX and GY be two LGs, and let CX and CY the respective concordance
ﬁles obtained by applying them to the same corpus. Thus, CX is the set of
occurrences identiﬁed by GX , and CY is the set of occurrences identiﬁed by GY .
Let CX ×CY be the ﬁle that shows the diﬀerences between concordances CX and
CY and is obtained through the ConcorDiﬀ program of Unitex. In CX × CY ,

Fig. 3. LG G2 (ReconheceNomesCompostos.grf)

Concordance Comparison as a Means of Assembling Local Grammars

61

Fig. 4. Part of the concordance comparison C1 × C2 (Color ﬁgure online)
Table 1. Main relationships observed through concordance comparison
Relation

Situation

Character color

Consequence

Inclusion

CX ⊂ CY

Blue and green (on
green background)
Blue and green (on
pink background)

Keep GY

Blue
Violet

Keep or GX or GY
Analyze ambiguity

Blue and green (on
diﬀerent backgrounds)

Keep GX and GY

Green (on green
background)
Green (on pink
background)
Green (on diﬀerent
backgrounds)

Keep GY

CY ⊂ CX
Intersection

Disjunction

Disjunction
with partial
overlapping of
occurrences

a

CX = CY
CX = CY
with diﬀerent
outputs
CX ∩ CY = ∅
CX ∩ CY = ∅,
with CX = ∅
CX ∩ CY = ∅,
with CY = ∅
CX ∩ CY = ∅

Keep GX

Keep GX
Keep GX and GY

CX ∩ CY = ∅, Red
with CX ∼
CY a

Keep GX if ∀i |xi | > |yi |,
keep GY if ∀i |xi | < |yi |

CX ∩ CY = ∅, Red and green (on
with ∃i ∃j xi identical background)
overlaps yj

Keep GX and GY if the
occurrences in green
characters are relevant. If
not, keep only the LG
that matches larger
occurrences

CX ∼ CY ⇔ (n = m and ∀i xi overlaps yi ).

the elements x1 , x2 , ..., xn of CX are displayed on a pink background, while
the elements y1 , y2 , ..., ym of CY are displayed on a green background. It may
exist between CX and CY some relationships of the set theory, such as inclusion,
intersection or disjunction, and these relationships can be observed by analyzing
CX × CY .

62

J. P. C. Pirovani et al.

Consider, for example, LGs G1 (Fig. 1) and G2 (Fig. 3). G2 recognizes person
names stored in dictionaries, through dictionary codes N+PR for proper names
and Hum for nouns referring to human beings. Multiword person names such as
Marilyn Monroe, Cameron Diaz and Albert Einstein are recognized by this LG
after applying the English dictionary to the input text.
Figure 4 shows part of the concordance comparison C1 ×C2 . The ﬁrst line, y1 ,
includes the name Jimmy Carter recognized by G2 . The ﬁrst line displayed on
a pink background, x1 , includes the name Afonso Henriques occurring after D.
and recognized by G1 . Since lines in green characters are occurrences identiﬁed
by only one of the two graphs, the ﬁrst two occurrences were identiﬁed by G2
only, and the last one by G1 only. If all the lines of the comparison are in green
characters and distributed between the two background colors, C1 and C2 are
disjoint sets: thus, both LGs G1 and G2 are worth retaining as subgraphs of a
grammar because they recognize diﬀerent names.
Table 1 summarizes the main set-theoretic relationships identiﬁed. Each situation has a consequence in terms of priority between LGs, for example: GX can
be discarded if GY is retained. After analysing relationships between all pairs
of LGs, we selected a subset of LGs and combined them into a larger LG (30
LGGs) by invoking them in a main graph.

3

Results and Discussion

We could not compare the performance of the obtained LG to the initial set of
small LGs, since this set does not make up a single annotator together. Instead,
we simply evaluated two annotators, one based on the obtained LG and another
on an enhanced version of it, and we compared the results to those of Rembrandt,
as a widely known reference.
We applied the obtained LG to the HAREM corpus and generated an XML
ﬁle with the identiﬁed NEs, annotated according to directives of the Second
HAREM. Parts of the person names identiﬁed by LG that appear isolated in the
text are also annotated.
This ﬁle was submitted to SAHARA [13] for performance evaluation.
SAHARA is an online system for automatic evaluation for HAREM, which computes the precision, recall and F-measure of an NER system after the user conﬁgures the evaluation and submits XML-annotated ﬁles.
The results obtained by applying the LG to the GC of the Second HAREM
were 59.06% for precision, 55.22% for recall and 57.07 for F-measure.
Then, we employed manual strategies to improve the performance of the
LG. In the Second HAREM, some words in lowercase letters should form part
of NE1 . For example, the honoriﬁc titles recognized by LGG in Fig. 1 and the
person’s social position that appears before the name. In an example provided
by HAREM,2 A rainha Isabel II surpreendeu a Inglaterra “Queen Elizabeth
1
2

http://www.linguateca.pt/aval conjunta/HAREM/minusculas.html.
http://www.linguateca.pt/aval conjunta/HAREM/ExemplarioSegundoHAREM.
pdf.

Concordance Comparison as a Means of Assembling Local Grammars

63

II surprised England”, not only the name Isabel, but the whole phrase rainha
Isabel II “Queen Elizabeth II” should be labeled as a person name.
We adapted the LGG ReconheceFormasDeTratamento.grf to address this
issue by simply shifting the tag (<NOME>) before the honoriﬁc title in the graph,
so that the title belongs to the tagged NE. Furthermore, we also used these
words in lowercase letters to recognize the ‘position’ subcategory of the ‘person’
category, represented by PERSON(POSITION), and to recognize person names
with a noun of social position in the left context.
The results obtained by the ﬁnal LG are presented in Table 2. They
were obtained with SAHARA by selecting the custom setting PERSON(INDIVIDUAL). This table also shows measures computed by SAHARA
for Rembrandt, the system with the best performance for the ‘person’ category
of the Second HAREM.
Table 2. Results considering PERSON(INDIVIDUAL): Rembrandt vs. ﬁnal LG
System

Precision (%) Recall (%) F-Measure (%)

Rembrandt 79

64.08

70.76

LG

74.18

76.86

79.75

The LG outperfoms Rembrandt. The recall of the LG is approximately 10 %
points above that of Rembrandt.
Although our LG recognizes only the ‘individual’ and ‘position’ subtypes of
the ‘person’ category, its evaluation was also carried out using SAHARA for all
types of categories by selecting the PERSON(*) setting. A comparison of the
obtained results with the results of the four tools presented in [2] for the ‘person’
category is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Results considering PERSON(*): Systems in [2] vs. ﬁnal LG
Systems

Precision (%) Recall (%) F-Measure (%)

NERP-CRF

57

51

54

Freeling

55

61

58

Language-Tasks 63

62

62

PALAVRAS

The LG has a better precision. However, as expected, it has a lower recall
as it identiﬁes fewer types of NEs: only two subtypes of the ‘person’ category
(‘individual’ and ‘position’) are recognized, whereas the other systems recognize
eight subtypes. We believe that with the addition of rules to the LG in order

64

J. P. C. Pirovani et al.

to recognize other subtypes of the ‘person’ category, the recall could be further
increased, improving the LG approach even more as compared to other tools.

4

Conclusions

This paper presented the use of the Unitex concordance comparison tool as a
computational aid in manual composition of LGs. We used this tool for the
composition of an LG to identify person names in texts written in Portuguese.
The same methodology can be applied to the construction of LGs for other
purposes.
Table 1 was created by listing the main set-theoretic relationships (inclusion,
intersection and disjunction) that we could observe when analyzing concordancecomparison ﬁles generated by Unitex. Taking into account these relationships,
we could produce a more compact and easily understandable grammar. We could
also observe that a concordance oﬀers an overview of what a LG recognizes in a
speciﬁc corpus, allowing ambiguities and false positives to be identiﬁed.
The results of out ﬁnal LG show its potential for NE extraction. It performed
better (gain of 6 points) than Rembrandt, the system with the best performance
for the ‘person’ category in the Second HAREM, when evaluating the ‘person’
category, ‘individual’ subtype, for which it was created.
As avenues for future work, we plan to apply the LG approach to other corpora of texts written in Portuguese, and to assess performance with a corpus not
used in the construction of the LG. Moreover, we may add rules for recognizing
other types of NEs. We also intend to study the feasibility of building elementary LGGs automatically or semi-automatically from examples, with the goal of
minimizing human eﬀort during construction. The concordance comparison tool
presented in this article might facilitate the automation of decision-making for
this purpose.
