Disambiguating Open IE: Identifying
Semantic Similarity in Relation
Extraction by Word Embeddings
Leandro M. P. Sanches(B) , Victor S. Cardel, Larissa S. Machado,
Marlo Souza, and Lais N. Salvador
Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil
leandrompsanches@gmail.com, vscardel@gmail.com, machad.lari@gmail.com,
{msouza1,laisns}@ufba.br

Abstract. Open Information Extraction (Open IE) methods enable the
extraction of structured relations from domain-independent unstructured
sources. However, due to lexical variation and polysemy, we argue it is
necessary to understand the meaning of an extracted relation, rather
than just extracting its textual structure. In the present work, we investigate diﬀerent methods for associating relations extracted by Open IE
systems with the semantic relations they describe by using word embedding models. The results presented in our experiments indicate that the
methods are ill-suited for this problem and show that there is still a lot
to research on the Relation Disambiguation in Portuguese.

Keywords: Relation Disambiguation
Semantic relations

1

· Open Information Extraction

Introduction

Information Extraction (IE) is the area that studies methods for obtaining structured information from unstructured textual sources. According to Etzioni [3],
the problem of IE “is the task of recognizing the assertion of a particular relationship between two or more entities in text”. Information Extraction is useful
to methods of question answering [3] and many other applications.
IE methods can be divided into Traditional IE, which focus on extracting
instances of a set of predeﬁned relations in a domain, and Open IE methods,
which aims to identify relations in a domain-independent scalable manner
[3,11,25,26].
While the Open IE paradigm attacked scalability and domain-independence
problems in IE methods, it has introduced problems of its own. Firstly, there
is the problem of lexical variation, i.e. the same relation can be expressed by
several diﬀerent textual descriptions. Also, the same superﬁcial structure can be
used to express diﬀerent meanings, a problem known as polysemy.
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
A. Villavicencio et al. (Eds.): PROPOR 2018, LNAI 11122, pp. 93–103, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99722-3_10

94

L. M. P. Sanches et al.

Due to these problems, it is arguable that the Open IE paradigm has achieved
its promises of automating IE. Particularly, it is not clear whether Open IE
methods can be applied in the context of Web as a Corpus, as proposed by
Banko et al. [3].
In this sense, for these methods to be applicable for IE, we argue it is necessary to understand the meaning of an extracted relation, rather than just presenting its textual structure. In other words, we need to associate relation instances
extracted by Open IE systems with the semantic relations they describe, when
one such relation is known - a problem we call Relation Disambiguation.
More formally, given a set of semantic relations and a relational fact
r1 = (e1 , rel, e2 ), we call Relation Disambiguation the process of identifying
which semantic relation expresses the same information as expressed in the fact
r1 , i.e. for which relation fact r1 is an instance.
In this work, we will investigate methods for Relation Disambiguation for
Portuguese. To achieve this, we will use word embedding models to identify
semantic similarity between relation descriptors obtained using an Open IE system and semantic relations described in a domain ontology.
This work is structured as follows: Sect. 2 describes the problem of lexical
variation in Open IE and the task of Relation Disambiguation, which we tackle in
this work; Sect. 3 presents the related work; Sect. 4 describes the methods studied
in this work and Sect. 5 presents the empirical evaluation of theses methods,
while Sect. 6 presents our discussions on these results. Finally, we present our
ﬁnal considerations.

2

IE and Open IE

Information Extraction is the area that studies methods for obtaining structured
information from unstructured sources. Traditional IE methods rely on manually
crafted identiﬁcation rules and/or supervised machine learning algorithms to
identify relation instances in the text. These methods require extensive human
involvement in crafting such rules and annotating large amounts of data. As
such, these methods are not easily adaptable to other domains nor are scalable
to large amounts of data. To overcome such diﬃculties, unsupervised methods
for information extraction were devised, aiming to identify relation instances
within text without previous knowledge of the domain [3,11,26].
While many methods focus on discovering shallow or syntactic patterns to
extract relations from text, specially in those works following the so-called Open
IE paradigm, few have been concerned with identifying the semantics of such
extractions. This approach, however, have some important limitations, in our
opinion.
First, the same information may be expressed in multiple ways, making it
hard for one to be able to retrieve all desired information when querying a
base constructed over such extractions. For example, consider the following text
fragment:

Disambiguating Open IE

95

S´
ocrates (470 a.C-399 a.C.) foi um importante ﬁl´
osofo grego do segundo
per´ıodo da ﬁlosoﬁa. Nasceu em Atenas (...) Tales de Mileto (624 a.C.548 a.C.), nascido na cidade de Mileto (...) Anaximandro de Mileto (610
a.C.-547 a.C.) foi um disc´ıpulo de Tales original de Mileto (...) [21]1
From this fragment, we can identify three diﬀerent textual descriptions for
the same information of one philosopher being born in a city: “nasceu” (was
born in), “nascido na cidade de” (born in the city of), “original de” (originated
from).
Also, the same superﬁcial structure can be used to express diﬀerent meanings,
e.g., “A plays B” means diﬀerent things whether A refers to a musician, to an
athlete, or to an actor - a problem known as polysemy.
Since most Open IE systems perform no semantic analysis, the semantic
similarity between the extracted relations cannot be detected by them. Consequently, the actual result of most of Open IE extraction diﬀers very little
from that of a shallow parser that identiﬁes Subject-Verb-Object structures in
sentences, reproducing the surface structure of the sentence, not its semantic
content.
In this work, we argue that recognizing semantic similarity can be of great
use for relation extraction, allowing for the extraction of semantic information
from an unstructured source.

3

Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, no methods have been proposed in the literature
for the task of Relation Disambiguation for Portuguese. For other languages,
works such as that of Lassen et al. [14] and Jacquemin et al. [12] aim to perform
semantic annotation of texts by object properties described in given ontology.
Lassen et al. [14] is an example of Traditional IE method and applies machine
learning to identify semantic relations within text. While Jacquemin et al. [12]
propose using word sense disambiguation, domain information and lexical semantic resources to perform semantic disambiguation. The ﬁrst method requires
manual annotation of the types of relations identiﬁed in the text and, as such,
presents diﬃculties regarding domain independence and scalability. The second
method, on the other hand, relies on the semantic relations present in lexical
ontologies to tackle lexical variation in Open IE. Since lexical ontologies are not
available for many languages and for all domains, we believe its applicability to
Open IE Relation Disambiguation is rather limited.
Works on ontology alignment, automatic ontology enriching or relational
discovery are also related to our problem, since they aim to identify semantic correspondences in relations described in diﬀerent ways. Regarding ontology
1

Socrates (470 B.C.E. - 399 B.C.E.) was an important greek philosopher of Philosophy’s second period. He was born in Athens (...) Thales of Miletus (624 B.C.E. - 548
B.C.E.) was born in the city of Miletus (...) Anaximander of Miletus (610 B.C.E. 547 B.C.E.) was a disciple of Thales originated from Miletus.

96

L. M. P. Sanches et al.

alignment, methods based on both intensional and extensional correspondence
are applicable to our problem. For example, the work of Van Diggelen et al. [23]
propose a protocol to compute logical correspondences of relations between two
terminologies, based on their extension, while works such as [9] propose the
use of lexical resources to identify similarities between the elements of diﬀerent
ontologies. Notice that while these methods are relevant to our problem, semantic resources such as ontologies are much more “well-behaved” then extractions
from unstructured sources and, as such, these methods can be very diﬃcult to
adapt to our problem.
Works on discovering new ontological relations using information extracted
from textual sources [4,17,20] are also related to our problem. While their focus
is identifying new relations to enrich an ontology, we believe they can also be
used for Relation Disambiguation and to reduce lexical variance in Open IE
systems.
In relation to the Open IE systems, to the best of out knowledge, there
are several available systems proposed in the literature, but only a few of which
proposed to process texts in the portuguese language. Among those, we highlight
the systems RePort [19], ArgOE [7], DepOE [8] and DependentIE [18].
Notice that the literature in word sense disambiguation is also interesting to
our study, but it is too numerous to analyse here and only tangentially related.
Even though it is true that word sense disambiguation can be used to improve
the performance of the Relation Disambiguation, the problems related to each
task are not the same.

4

Relation Disambiguation

In this work, given a set of relation extractions and a set of previously known
semantic relations, we study how to identify which relation extractions are
instances of each known semantic relation. To do this, we will explore the use of
word embedding models - namely Word2Vec [15] models - to identify semantic
similarity between relation descriptors. In this work, we study three methods of
Relation Disambiguation.
The ﬁrst method studied by us, our baseline, consists of directly computing
the semantic similarity between each relation descriptor rel in an extraction
t = (e1 , rel, e2 ) and (the name of) each semantic relation (object and data
properties [24]) in the ontology. The tuple t is disambiguated as an instance of the
relation r for which it has the highest semantic similarity, as long as this measure
is above some empirically deﬁned conﬁdence threshold, called disambiguation
threshold.
As a metric of semantic similarity, we use cosine similarity between these
two sets, deﬁned by Eq. 1 [20], in which Ti is a set of words, |Ti | is the number
of words in Ti and maxSim(w, Ti ) is the maximum similarity value between a
word w in Ti and some word in Ti , based on a Word2Vec model.
sim(T1 , T2 ) =

1
2

w∈T1 (maxSim(w, T2 ))

|T1 |

+

w∈T2 (maxSim(w, T1 ))

|T2 |

(1)

Disambiguating Open IE

97

This baseline is a simplistic proposal, since it assumes that the surface structure of a relation descriptor describing some semantic relation must be more
related (in meaning) to this relation than to any other. Moreover, since the
semantic similarity metric is computed based purely on the words that compose
a descriptor and not its structure, and due to the substantial variation in the
form in which an information can be expressed via text, we believe this strategy
may not be able to identify all instances of a relation.
To overcome this problem, based on the work of Subhashree and Kumar [20]
on discovering new semantic relations, we propose the second method, which
consists of grouping the relation descriptors into clusters based on semantic similarity and disambiguating each cluster to the known semantic relations. Performing such clustering of semantic descriptors, we believe, may reduce the impact
of descriptor variability in the disambiguation process, creating a more accurate
representation of the meaning of relation expressed by that cluster.
To perform the clustering, the relation descriptors are ﬁltered according to
their adequacy of the relation descriptor to the domain of discourse - as described
by the ontology. This adequacy is established by calculating the word-to-word
similarity between the relation descriptor and the main concepts of the domain,
using the Word2Vec model and cosine similarity. Any relation descriptor with
adequacy below a signiﬁcance threshold is discarded from the set.
Subsequently, the clustering algorithm uses the semantic similarity measure
described in Eq. 1 to decide in which cluster a given relation descriptor should be
included. If the similarity between a given relation descriptor and every cluster is
below a given clustering threshold, a new cluster is created with this relation. The
disambiguation of the entire cluster as a semantic relation is, then, performed
as before by taking the maximal similarity between any descriptor in the cluster
and the known semantic relations.
Notice that our second method uses only intensional information for relation clustering and disambiguation. However, semantic relations also possess
extensional information which could be used in the disambiguation process. As
such, we developed our third method which relies on extensional information
for clustering and, as it has been done before, intensional information for disambiguation. So in this approach, relation descriptors are clustered based on
the frequency of arguments co-occurrence between the two descriptors using the
K-Means algorithm. Our third method is an adaptation of Mohamed et al.’s [16]
method for discovering new relations.

5

Evaluation

In this section, we describe the empirical validation of our methods, the data used
and the results achieved, considering diﬀerent values for the disambiguation and
clustering thresholds. Our experiments were performed on the domain of contemporary art using the Contemporary Art Ontology [22]. The Contemporary Art
Ontology is a domain ontology constructed in the portuguese language composed
of 149 classes, 18 object properties and 14 data properties [22]. We present some
examples of the object properties of the ontology (in translated form) in Table 1.

98

L. M. P. Sanches et al.
Table 1. Examples of object properties of the contemporary art ontology
Property

Domain

Range

act as

Person

Profession

born in

Person

Geographic Object

produced by

Event or Work of Art or Registry

Organization or Person

author acting as Collection or Event or Work of Art Profession
conceived at

Work of Art

Geographic Object

The choice of this ontology was due to the fact that it was previously applied
for semantic annotation of multimedia contents [22]. Since we believe automatic
semantic annotation is a natural application for Open IE methods, we believe
that such an ontology - and thus domain - would provide an interesting case of
study to our methods.
5.1

The Data

In our experiments, we used as input for the Open IE tool a corpus consisted of
370 Wikipedia articles in Portuguese from the domain of contemporary art. To
construct this corpus, we retrieved articles within 34 Wikipedia categories manually selected for the domain, including information about artists, painters, writers, artworks and contemporary architecture. The articles were further cleaned
removing hyperlinks, tables, lists and Wikipedia structure using the WikiExtractor tool [2].
This input corpus was subsequently processed by Gamallo and Garcia’s multilingual Open IE tool ArgOE [7]. The choice of ArgOE was due to the fact that
it was the only tool for the portuguese language for which the source code was
readily available, as far we know. From the relations extracted by ArgOE, we
discarded all extractions missing arguments, resulting in 8370 extracted relation
triples.
For the evaluation, 110 triples out of the 8370 triples were randomly selected
and distributed to four human annotators, who performed manual disambiguation of the relations according to the target ontology. Each relation triple could
be classiﬁed as an instance of a relation (object or data property) in the ontology
or not having any equivalent representation in it.
Each annotator received a set of 35 triples to annotate, with 10 triples in
common between all annotators. The 10 common triples were used compute
inter-annotator agreement, while the remaining 100 were used to evaluate other
methods proposed in Sect. 4. In order to establish a consensus among the annotators about the annotation process, we performed a training of the human
annotators in which we discussed the phenomenon to be analyzed, explained the
structure of the ontology and discussed how to perform the disambiguation.
As previously mentioned, to identify semantic similarity between relation
descriptors we explored the use of Word2Vec [15] models. Our Word2Vec model

Disambiguating Open IE

99

was trained over the corpus of Brazilian Portuguese journalistic texts CETENFOLHA2 , which has more than 25 thousand words.
We also trained a second Word2Vec model over the CETENFOLHA corpus
and our Wikipedia articles corpus, but the obtained model performed much
poorly than the one trained exclusively on the CETENFOLHA corpus. We
believe that diﬀerences in the tokenization model and lexicon between the sources
introduced noise in the model, explaining thus its poorer performance. As such,
in this work, we choose to use the model trained only on the CETENFOLHA
corpus.
5.2

Methodology

The three methods described in Sect. 4 were implemented in Java, using Apache
Jena [1] to access the ontology, the Weka workbench [6] implementation of the KMeans clustering and Deeplearning4j library [5] implementation of the Word2Vec
training algorithm with Skipgram and 200 dimensions [15].
The evaluation was performed using accuracy (A), precision (P), recall (R)
and F-measure (F1) metrics calculated by comparing relations disambiguated by
each method with the ones disambiguated by human experts. In this evaluation,
we varied the disambiguation and clustering threshold values in order to better
understand how these values impact the quality of the result of each method.
In this work, we consider accuracy as the ratio of agreement between the
predictions by the method and the human annotators among all annotations,
i.e. including those relations which have not been disambiguated as a semantic
relation of the ontology. On the other hand, precision is computed as the ratio
between the relation descriptors which have been correctly disambiguated as
a semantic relation and all the triples which have been disambiguated by the
system. Finally, recall is computed by the ratio between the relations which
have been correctly disambiguated by the system and the amount of the relations
disambiguated as an instance of a semantic relation in the ontology by the human
annotators.
5.3

Results

Regarding the manual disambiguation of triples performed by the human judges,
just a total of 11 triples out of the set of 100 randomly selected relations were
successful associated to a relation in the ontology by human annotators. From
the 10 extractions in common between the 4 annotators, we obtained a value
for Fleiss’ Kappa coeﬃcient [13] of 0.52, indicating an overall moderate interannotator agreement.
We evaluated all three methods varying the value of the disambiguation
threshold from the values 0.1 to 0.9. The results are shown in the Table 2 where
a clustering threshold of 0.6 and a domain adequacy threshold of 0.35 were used
for the second method, while the number of clusters was set as K = 40 for the
third method, a number superior to that of relations in the ontology.
2

https://www.linguateca.pt/cetenfolha/.

100

L. M. P. Sanches et al.
Table 2. Results of the evaluation for the three methods

T

First method
P
R

F1

A

Second method Third method
P R F1 A
P
R
F1

A

0.1 0.0004 0.2727 0.0007 0.09 0 0 0

0.84 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.02

0.2 0.0004 0.2727 0.0008 0.24 0 0 0

0.84 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.02

0.3 0.0007 0.2727 0.0013 0.48 0 0 0

0.84 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.02

0.4 0.0010 0.2727 0.002

0.62 0 0 0

0.85 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.02

0.5 0.017 0.2727 0.034 0.71 0 0 0

0.87 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.02

0.6 0.0041 0.1818

0.008

0.85 0 0 0

0.88 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.02

0.7 0.0137 0.1818

0.0255 0.87 0 0 0

0.89 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.03

0.8 0

0

0

0.88 0 0 0

0.89 0.0002 0.0909 0.0003 0.03

0.9 0

0

0

0.89 0 0 0

0.89 0.0002 0.4909 0.0003 0.03

As shown in Table 2, the ﬁrst method achieved better F1-score. However,
with the thresholds above 0.7, the threshold becomes very restrictive and the
method cannot disambiguate the relations any longer.
In both the ﬁrst and the second methods, the accuracy increases with higher
disambiguation thresholds. This happens due to the fact that 89% of the triples in
the evaluation dataset were not manually associated to any ontology property. As
such, higher values for the disambiguation threshold means less disambiguated
triples, which reduces the chances of errors by the system, thus elevating its
accuracy.
We also evaluated the impact of the clustering threshold in the second
method. The experiments, however, indicated no impact in either Precision and
Recall, and only limited impact on Accuracy - obtaining a value of 0.85 for a
clustering threshold of 0.10 and a value of 0.89 for a clustering threshold of 0.9.

6

Discussion

The results presented in this work indicate that the methods may be ill-suited
for the problem of Relation Disambiguation. Notice that, while some of the
methods achieved high accuracy in our experiments, this result is due to the
extreme imbalance on the experimental data - which is expected from the fact
that Open IE aims at extracting all possible semantic relations from text, not
only a limited number restricted to a domain.
One possible reason for the poor performance of the methods lie in the word
embedding model used in this work. Notice that our model was trained using
Word2Vec algorithm using skipgram with only 200 dimensions over a relatively
small corpus. We chose a relatively small dimensionality for the representation
space due to limits in our computational resources and due to the high cost of
processing a larger model.

Disambiguating Open IE

101

A common problem also concerns the extractions made by the preprocessing tool. The ArgOE extraction performs poorly in the chosen domain,
mainly due to problem in the syntactic analysis of the texts, e.g the triple:
(“a provoca¸c˜
ao”, “passa as nossas rea¸c˜
oes pela”, “exigˆencia”) 3 was extracted
from the sentence “A provoca¸c˜
ao nas obras de Gra¸ca Martins passa pela
exigˆencia de tornarmos consequentes as nossas rea¸c˜
oes” 4 .
Diﬀerent to the ﬁrst two methods, the third method’s poor results was also
probably caused by the fact that, due to the arguments have not been also
disambiguated into entities, few or no co-occurrences were found between the
majority of the relations - which prevents the clustering algorithm of ﬁnding
any useful information to create suitable clusters.

7

Final Considerations

In this work, we tackle the problem of Relation Disambiguation for Open IE
systems for the portuguese language. To do this, we implemented three methods
of identifying when a relational descriptor in a set of Open IE extractions possess
the same semantic information as a previously known semantic relation.
Our methods consider diﬀerent approaches to accomplish this disambiguation. The ﬁrst and second methods have intensional approaches applying cosine
similarity calculation through a Word2Vec model and the third method makes
use of an extensional approach constructing descriptors co-occurrence matrices.
Another diﬀerence is related to the way to carry out the disambiguation,
the second and third method use clusters to group similar descriptors with posteriori descriptors disambiguation. In contrast, the ﬁrst method performs the
disambiguation of relations individually.
As shown in the experiments, all these methods did not present satisfactory
results according to F-measure, showing that little or no information has been
disambiguated correctly. The poor results show that Relation Disambiguation
is not an easy problem to solve and there is still a lot to research to be done
on this topic. Particularly, for the portuguese language, for which there is a
limited number of good IE and Open IE systems available, obtaining good quality
Relation Disambiguation methods seems essential to improve results in areas
such as question answering.
As an immediate future work, we aim to evaluate the eﬀect of diﬀerent highquality word embedding models for the Portuguese language in the studied disambiguation methods, as studied by Hartman et al. [10].
Acknowledgements. This study was partially funded by Coordena¸c˜
ao de Aperfei¸coamento de Pessoal de N´ıvel Superior (CAPES) and by Funda¸c˜
ao de Amparo a
`
Pesquisa do Estado da Bahia (FAPESB).
3
4

(“The provocation”, “goes through our reactions to the”, “demand”).
“The provocation in Grace Martins’s works goes through the demand to make our
reactions consistent”, in English.

102

L. M. P. Sanches et al.

References
1. Apache Software Foundation: Apache jena: a free and open source java framework
for building semantic web and linked data applications (2018). https://jena.apache.
org/
2. Attardi, G.: Wikipedia extractor (2016). http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/
Wikipedia Extractor
3. Banko, M., Cafarella, M.J., Soderland, S., Broadhead, M., Etzioni, O.: Open information extraction from the web. In: Proceedings of the Twentieth International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hyderabad, pp. 2670–2676 (2007)
4. Barchi, P.H., Hruschka, E.R.: Never-ending ontology extension through machine
reading. In: Hybrid Intelligent Systems (HIS), pp. 266–272. IEEE (2014). https://
doi.org/10.1109/HIS.2014.7086210
5. Deeplearning4j DT: Deeplearning4j: open-source distributed deep learning for the
JVM (2017). http://deeplearning4j.org
6. Frank, E., Hall, M.A., Witten, I.H.: The WEKA Workbench. Online Appendix for
Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 4th edn. Morgan
Kaufmann, Online (2016). https://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/Witten et al
2016 appendix.pdf
7. Gamallo, P., Garcia, M.: Multilingual open information extraction. In: Pereira, F.,
Machado, P., Costa, E., Cardoso, A. (eds.) EPIA 2015. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 9273,
pp. 711–722. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-234854 72
8. Gamallo, P., Garcia, M., Fernandez-Lanza, S.: Dependency-based open information
extraction. In: Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Unsupervised and SemiSupervised Learning in NLP, pp. 10–18. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg (2012)
9. Giunchiglia, F., Shvaiko, P., Yatskevich, M.: S-match: an algorithm and an implementation of semantic matching. In: Bussler, C.J., Davies, J., Fensel, D., Studer,
R. (eds.) ESWS 2004. LNCS, vol. 3053, pp. 61–75. Springer, Heidelberg (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-25956-5 5
10. Hartmann, N., Fonseca, E., Shulby, C., Treviso, M., Silva, J., Alu´ısio, S.: Portuguese
word embeddings: Evaluating on word analogies and natural language tasks. In:
Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian Symposium in Information and Human Language
Technology, pp. 122–131 (2017)
11. Hasegawa, T., Sekine, S., Grishman, R.: Discovering relations among name dentities from large corpora. In: Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, p. 415. Association for Computational Linguistics
(2004)
12. Jacquemin, B., Brun, C., Roux, C.: Enriching a text by semantic disambiguation
for information extraction. In: Proceeding of the Workshop on Using Semantics for
Information Retrieval and Filtering: State of the Art and Future Research (LREC
2002), Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain, pp. 45–51 (2002). http://arxiv.org/abs/
cs/0506048
13. Landis, J.R., Koch, G.G.: The measurement of observer agreement for categorical
data. Biometrics 33(1), 159–174 (1977). http://www.jstor.org/stable/2529310
14. Lassen, T., Terney, T.V.: An ontology-based approach to disambiguation of semantic relations. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Learning Structured Information
in Natural Language Applications (2006)

