Abstract. In Second Language Acquisition (SLA), the exposure of
learners to authentic material is an important learning step, but the
use of raw text may pose problems, because the information that the
learner should be focusing on may be overlooked. In this paper, we
present SMILLE for Portuguese, a system for detecting pedagogically
relevant grammatical structures in raw texts. SMILLE’s rules for recognizing grammatical structures were evaluated in random sentences from
three diﬀerent genres, achieving an overall precision of 84%. The automatic recognition of pedagogically relevant grammatical structures can
help teachers and course coordinators to better inform the choice of texts
to be used in language courses, while also allowing for the analysis of
grammar proﬁles for SLA. As a case study, we used SMILLE to analyze
pedagogical material used in a Portuguese as foreign language course and
to observe how the predominance of grammatical content in the texts is
related to the described grammatical focus of the language levels.
Keywords: Second Language Acquisition · Grammatical structures
Natural Language Processing · Grammatical parsing for Portuguese

1

Introduction

Research on the ﬁeld of Second Language Acquisition (SLA) has already shown
that the mere presentation of input to a language learner is not enough for ensuring that something will be learned [9]. This means that the language learner may
process the input for its meaning alone, without noticing its linguistic structures,
because there is no salient language information. Input is understood as language
data that is potentially processable and made available, by chance or by design,
to language learners [15]. On the other hand, the intake is the part of the input
which is actually internalized by a learner and that can potentially be stored in
the long-term memory [11].
Supported by the Walloon Region (Projects BEWARE 1510637 and 1610378) and
Altissia International.
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
A. Villavicencio et al. (Eds.): PROPOR 2018, LNAI 11122, pp. 13–23, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99722-3_2

14

An input in its raw form has lower chances of being converted into intake by
the learner, and may thus not bring any new linguistic information. In the early
90’s, Schmidt [12] developed the hypothesis that, in order for language learners
to convert input into intake, they have to notice the relevant information in the
input. Schmidt would later state, in a less controversial way, that “people learn
about the things that they attend to and do not learn much about the things they
do not attend to” [13]. There is much discussion regarding the assumptions of the
Noticing Hypothesis, and it has its contesters (e.g. Truscott [18]). Nevertheless,
it seems to be of general agreement that noticing is at least a facilitator of the
language learning process, even though there are diﬀerences in the way that
authors view the process of noticing, either as a purely conscious process or as
a possibly unconscious process [5].
In this context, raw input may not present properties for drawing the learner’s
attention, especially when one deals with authentic texts, which are normally not
meant as a language learning object. In an attempt to solve the lack of salience in
raw input, Smith and Truscott [16] suggested the use of what they called “input
enhancements”, so as to give prominence to the relevant linguistic information.
This “focus-on-form strategy” [6] has provided a new way to assist language
learners, and some studies have shown that input enhancements represent a
positive step in transforming input into intake (e.g. [10,14]).
In this paper, we present SMILLE (Smart and Immersive Language Learning
Environment) for Portuguese1 , a system that can analyze and enhance written
texts by employing Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques for automatically retrieving pedagogically relevant grammatical structures. By highlighting
pedagogically interesting structures in texts, SMILLE can be used by language
teachers to automatically locate speciﬁc grammatical structures in texts and to
evaluate if the texts that they are going to use with their learners are adequate to
their language level. For instance, some structures introduced in a given moment
may not be fully understood by the learners until they reach a more advanced
level – this is specially the case for structures that are seen at the end of each
level. As such, using a text that exposes the learner to all structures of a level
may lead to over-exposure and cause the learner to lose focus. In this context,
it is important to analyze to which structures the learner is being exposed during the second language learning process. Besides the more directly pedagogical
application of SMILLE (i.e., enhancing grammatical structures), its association
with a second language learning curriculum makes of it a useful tool for analyzing
the pedagogical material of second language courses.
Since SMILLE prioritizes a pedagogical approach to information extraction,
some of the automatically annotated grammatical structures are not directly
recognized from part-of-speech-tagger or dependency-parser information (such
as hidden and explicit subject and passive voice) and, thus, they are recognized
through rules based on the more generic parser information. These rules are not
trivial, and, thus, in this paper we want to especially observe the precision of
1

The system is available for testing at https://cental.uclouvain.be/resources/smalla
smille/smille/.

SMILLE for Portuguese

15

SMILLE’s rules, because, as stated by Meurers et al. [9], in language learning,
precision tends to be more important than recall.
In addition to observing SMILLE’s precision, we also put it to test in analyzing the pedagogical material used in a Portuguese as foreign language course.
This analysis was designed to take into account the distribution of grammatical structures in the pedagogical material, in order to observe how the textual
content presented to the learners aligns with the grammatical content that is
taught in the diﬀerent levels. In brief, this analysis is a proﬁle of grammatical
structures that occur in the texts of the pedagogical material, and this proﬁle
will then be contrasted with the structures presented in the course’s handbooks.
Our hypothesis is that the grammatical content of the handbook for the basic
level will be signiﬁcantly more prominent (95% conﬁdence) in the basic level
texts. Conversely, the grammar of the advanced level will be signiﬁcantly more
prominent in the texts for the advanced level.
This paper is organized as follows: we present information on related work
in Sect. 2; next, we describe SMILLE’s annotated structures in Sect. 3; Sect. 4
presents evaluation of SMILLE’s annotation in diﬀerent corpora; in Sect. 5, we
explain and present the results of our experiment with the pedagogical material;
and, ﬁnally, in Sect. 6 we present our ﬁnal remarks and future work.

2

Related Work

In this section, we describe applications developed in the context of Second
Language Acquisition (SLA) that can retrieve pedagogical information from raw
texts and enhance it to learners.
The REAP project [3] is a tutoring system for English that focuses on ﬁnding
authentic, Web-based texts that are suitable for the user in terms of reading level.
The system also highlights words that are supposedly not known by the user.
There is also a REAP.PT project [8] that was ported from English to European
Portuguese and then further developed to also encompass gamiﬁcation and user
interaction in a 3D environment.
The WERTi system [9] allows for text enhancements of selected linguistic elements of English, Spanish and German. WERTi uses NLP tools combined with
rules and regular expressions to retrieve text information for each of seven linguistic subjects: articles, determiners, gerunds, noun countability, phrasal verbs,
prepositions, wh-questions.
SmartReader, developed by Azab et al. [1,2], provides a reading assistant
tool that is fully based on the structures annotated by Stanford CoreNLP [7].
Each word in the text can also be clicked on to display semantic, syntactic and
other information. It also displays syntactic function of selected words in the
given sentence and generates simple questions about named entities, provided
the answers are in the near context.
The FLAIR system is an online information retrieval system that annotates
and re-ranks Web documents based on user-selected grammatical constructions
[4]. It can recognize 87 diﬀerent types of grammatical structures described in the
oﬃcial curriculum of English as foreign language used in German schools.

16

L. Zilio et al.

SMILLE distinguishes itself from these systems in how the enhancements
are selected. For instance, in WERTi, only a few grammatical structures are
available, while SmartReader and REAP present information more relevant to
the meaning of the words and lexical units, and rely exclusively on parsing for
retrieving grammatical structures. And, although FLAIR and SMILLE share a
bigger scope in terms of detected grammatical information, the focus of FLAIR
lies on text retrieval, while SMILLE focuses on the recognition process. In addition, with the exception of REAP, the other systems do not focus on Portuguese.

3

Grammatical Structures in SMILLE

SMILLE was originally developed for English [20,22,23], and then was further
extended to Portuguese, both understood as a foreign language for the learner.
This extension to Portuguese included a fully new set of rules that were developed
based on the grammatical structures that are deemed important in a Portugueseas-foreign-language course2 .
SMILLE links the detected information to the guidelines of the Common
European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) [19], so that the grammatical enhancements are not limited to isolated linguistic structures, but covers
the needs for a given language level and for speciﬁc linguistic knowledge that is
required from the learner in proﬁciency tests. By applying rules on top of the
parser annotation3 , SMILLE also detects grammatical structures that are not
directly retrieved from parsing. As such, for instance, teachers can select texts
that are interesting according to their learner’s preferences, while keeping an eye
on important information in terms of linguistic structures that are relevant for
their process of acquiring a second language.
SMILLE uses the PassPort system [21], a dependency parsing system based
on Universal Dependency tags and PALAVRAS part-of-speech tags, as basis.
Thus, much of the grammatical information that is detected by SMILLE for
Portuguese requires only that the underlying parser correctly analyze the word
or structure in question. Such is the case, for instance, of some adverbs, adjectives and simple verb tenses. However, some structures require rules on top of
part-of-speech and dependency tags for retrieving more complex grammatical
constructions, such as compound verb tenses, passive voice and relative clauses.
And other structures still, such as comparatives and some adverbial phrases, are
retrieved based on speciﬁc rules. As such, SMILLE combines the analysis done
by the parser with hand-written rules to extract text information that would
not be easily identiﬁed, and would not be salient, in a raw input. Several rules
in SMILLE are the mere association of diﬀerent part-of-speech tags and dependency tags or attachments (e.g., compound tenses), other rules require much
more complex pattern matching, with multiple possibilities, especially in the
case of comparatives, which can appear in several diﬀerent forms.
2
3

Our grammatical structures were based on the course developed by Altissia International (www.altissia.com).
SMILLE for Portuguese makes use of the PassPort system [21].

SMILLE for Portuguese

17

While developing SMILLE, we had to make a decision regarding the granularity of grammatical structures and the escalation of knowledge associated
to each language level. In a language course, diﬀerent grammatical structures
can be learned in progressive steps, so, for instance, today a language learner
may study the relative pronoun “que” (approx. “that/which”) and later, during another session, it is possible to learn the relative pronoun “quem” (approx.
“who”). In authentic texts, the chances are that diﬀerent pronouns will appear
at the same time, interwoven in the text. To address this ﬁne-grained diﬀerentiation, SMILLE would have to encompass speciﬁc rules for each case, sometimes
for each word in a grammatical category. This would require more processing and
an increase in the number of rules. So, although SMILLE respects the escalation
related to diﬀerent language levels (e.g., grammatical structures from diﬀerent
levels were separated in speciﬁc rules), the progression of content in the same
level was overruled and generalized in overarching classes of grammatical structures, such as “relative pronouns”.
SMILLE for Portuguese contains a total of 71 rules for recognizing pedagogically relevant grammatical structures in written texts. These rules encompass
both the Brazilian and the European variants and are based on the CEFR levels from A1 to B2, and each rule is linked to a speciﬁc level. Here is a list of
grammatical structures that SMILLE can detect in Portuguese texts4 : prepositions, articles, use of pronouns “tu” and “vocˆe”, pronouns used as indirect
and direct complements, possessive pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, comparatives, adjectives, plural forms, nouns, expression of preferences, imperative,
expressions of obligation, various verb tenses (including progressive ones), interrogative sentences, irregular verbs, uses of “ser”, “estar”, “ter” and “haver”,
diminutives, direct and indirect complements, superlative, ﬁnal clauses, relative
clauses and pronouns, verbal periphrases, numbers, possessives, indeﬁnite pronouns, use of the pronoun “si”, several types of adverbs and adverbs derived
from adjectives, passive voice, hidden and explicit subjects, and use of clitics.

4

Evaluation of Selected Structures

For evaluating the quality of the rules used for recognizing the diﬀerent, pedagogically relevant grammatical structures that SMILLE can display to the user,
and to see which ones can be trusted for further analyses, we used random sentences from three diﬀerent genres and applied SMILLE’s pipeline of parsing and
rules annotation.
First, we selected three diﬀerent genres: literature5 , newspaper articles (from
the Di´
ario Ga´
ucho corpus6 ) and subtitles (from the Portuguese corpus of subti4

5
6

We do not present here the 71 rules because many of the grammatical structures are
divided along the CEFR levels, presenting some basic content in lower levels and
reinforcing them in higher levels, and others are divided in diﬀerent categories, such
as the verb tenses, the comparative forms, the types of adverbs, etc.
Selected romances from www.dominiopublico.gov.br.
This corpus was compiled in the scope of the project PorPopular (www.ufrgs.br/
textecc/porlexbras/porpopular/index.php).

18

L. Zilio et al.

tles compiled by Tiedemann [17]). We then annotated the corpora with SMILLE
and randomly extracted 25 sentences for each structure from each corpus to be
manually evaluated, totaling 75 sentences/instances per structure7 . Finally, a
manual evaluation was carried out by one linguist. Here are example sentences
for the 20 structures that were manually evaluated in terms of precision (the
main words associated with the structure are marked in italic):
Table 1 shows results of the annotation divided by structure and genre. As we
can see, most of the structures have high precision, so that the mean precision
lies at 84.07% for the evaluated structures, and the median is 88%. The literature
genre seems to pose more problems for the annotation, with a mean of 83.58%
and a median of 84%; newspaper articles were worse in the mean precision, with
82.32%, but the median was much higher, at 92%; ﬁnally, the subtitles had the
best mean precision, at 86.32%, and median, at 96%. In terms of individual
structures, there were very few for which the genre seems decisive, and most
of them had either generally bad performance, like reﬂexives, or generally good
performance, like the progressive tenses. Even so, we see some structures, like
the compound future or the hidden or explicit pronominal subjects, that present
an unbalance in the precision evaluation towards one genre.
This precision evaluation showed us which structures can be used in further
analyzing the pedagogical material in terms of content and organization per
level. The material and the analysis are described in the next section.

Having evaluated the structures that SMILLE annotates by means of rules, we
turned ourselves to the task of analyzing how courses of Portuguese as foreign
language are organized in terms of grammar and how they present this information in the texts that exist in their pedagogical material. As a case study,
we selected the material developed at the Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora
(UFJF) and used in its course for Brazilian Portuguese learners8 .
The corpus is composed of texts from handbooks used for teaching Brazilian
Portuguese to foreigners at the UFJF and covers basic and intermediate levels.
Since the rules of SMILLE covers those two levels of the CEFR, the non-existence
of an advanced level was not a problem for our analysis. We also ignored the levels
to which each of the SMILLE’s structures are linked in the CEFR and considered
only the curriculum of the speciﬁc course, as stated in the handbooks. The corpus
contains texts used in reading activities, but we excluded texts with gaps used
for exercises or texts that explained grammatical content of the language course.
We also excluded lyrics and poetry, since these genres tend to use diﬀerent
punctuation and structure. The texts are skewed to the informative genre, with
more emphasis to magazine and history articles, but there are also dialogues,
literature, opinion, and general descriptions. The corpus contains 19,741 tokens
(8,031 for basic and 11,710 for intermediate) distributed along 957 sentences
(421 for basic and 536 for intermediate). It was annotated with all SMILLE
structures for Portuguese and the frequencies were then standardized according
to the number of sentences per document (in the case of syntactic structures) or
tokens per document (for morphological or lexical structures).
For the analysis, we excluded grammatical structures that had less than 80%
precision in the evaluation, but we added structures that are directly based on
parser information (like simple verb tenses and word classes), since the parser has
around 94% of accuracy for part-of-speech tagging and around 85% of accuracy
for dependency parsing [21]. We analyzed the corpus in terms of distribution of
grammatical structures at each level, looking at the most prominent structures
in each of them in terms of signiﬁcant diﬀerences in relative frequency between
both levels. We then contrasted the diﬀerent prominences with the presented
grammatical structure of the handbooks to see if they are in consonance in
terms of presentation of structures and exposure of learners to the structures.
By running a Mann-Whitney U test, we could see that some structures have a
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent occurrence (p < 0.05) in both corpora. Some grammatical
structures, like the present tense overall and, in speciﬁc, the present tense of
the verb “ter”, and the use of personal pronouns as subject, are signiﬁcantly
more prominent in the sentences of the basic level, as expected according to the
pedagogical content of the handbook. Looking at the intermediate level, we have
structures like the past future and the past imperfect tense as more prominent.
According to the dispositions in the handbooks, both these tenses are taught
at the end of the basic level and are reviewed with more emphasis during the
intermediate level, so their predominance at the review level is understandable.
Probably due to the size of the corpus, some structures that have a diﬀerent occurrence in both levels did not achieve a signiﬁcant level of conﬁdence
(p < 0.05). So, for instance, the present forms of the verb “ser” and all forms
of the present of the conjunctive occur more than double in texts from the
basic level, where they are indeed emphasized according to the grammar content of the handbooks. On the other hand, structures associated to questions,
like interrogative pronouns and simple questions in the present tense were over
twice more frequent per sentence at the intermediate level, even though the formation of questions are emphasized as a topic at the basic level. Most of the
observed structures did not show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence and occur in a similar
way in both basic and the intermediate levels, and this suggests that most of the
texts used in the corpus are not there to emphasize grammatical aspects of the
language.
This type of analysis can aid teachers and pedagogical coordinators in the
task of preparing a Portuguese as foreign language course in a way that the
texts can better reﬂect and emphasize the grammatical content that is being

SMILLE for Portuguese

21

taught. In this analysis, our hypothesis that the texts would match their level
were conﬁrmed for the structures for which we had signiﬁcant diﬀerences, but
there are clues that some of the content from the intermediate level may be,
in fact, too basic. A more in detail evaluation of each text would need to be
performed to gauge the full extent to which the texts match their level, but this
type of analysis is beyond the scope of this paper.

6

Final Remarks

In this paper, we presented SMILLE for Portuguese, a system that can recognize pedagogically relevant grammatical structures in raw texts. SMILLE covers
structures from levels A1 to B2 following a CEFR categorization, corresponding to the basic and intermediate levels. It can be used not only to enhance
texts that are to be used with language learners, but it can also be applied in
the selection of these texts. As such, a teacher would have a help in selecting
more appropriate texts based on their grammatical proﬁle and the grammatical
structures that need to be emphasized for the learners.
Since many of the recognized structures use rules on top of the parser annotation, we carried out a precision evaluation in three diﬀerent genres: newspaper
articles, literature and subtitles. Most of the structures scored as high as 100%
of precision, such as the comparatives and the present continuous tense, but
some of them, such as reﬂexive pronouns and verbal periphrases, scored much
lower (respectively, 44% and 45.3%). Overall, the system achieved an average
precision of 84% in the evaluated structures. For the structures that presented
bad performance, we saw a mix of bad parsing performance and bad rules, so
that we will be addressing these issues for the future versions of the system.
We also presented a case study of how SMILLE can be applied to observe
the adequacy of texts used in Portuguese as foreign language courses. For that,
we analyzed the texts presented in handbooks of the language course held at the
Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora. This analysis was performed to observe
if the texts in each of the two available levels (basic and intermediate) actually
emphasize the grammatical content that is described in the handbooks. From
the structures that had signiﬁcantly diﬀerent use in both levels, we could observe
that they do follow the description provided in the handbooks for the basic and
the intermediate levels. Nevertheless, for some of the structures, there was a
large diﬀerence (more than double) in terms of average relative frequency in the
texts (but with no signiﬁcant diﬀerence), pointing to a possible mismatch with
the level’s grammatical content and suggesting that further investigation would
be needed to evaluate the adequacy of their distribution in the texts.
SMILLE can detect grammatical structures that are relevant for the learning of Portuguese as a foreign language and it can help analyze texts used in
language courses, but it could also be applied to analyze a full proﬁle of, for
instance, how learners of Portuguese tend to write their texts in terms of grammatical organization. As future work, we are interested in expanding the corpus
of handbook texts and include also learners’ texts, to be able to compare how
both these instances of language learning behave in terms of grammar.
